Optimization based on Data Mining
EXAMPLES
Laura Hervert-Escobar
13 Abril 2018

Applications
 Firm Financial Analysis
 Personal Credit Management
 Health Insurance Fraud Detection
 Network Intrusion Detection
 Internet Service Analysis
 HIV-1 Informatics
 Anti-gen and Anti-Body Informatics
 Geochemical Analysis
 Intelligent Knowledge Management

Firm financial Analysis
 Financial institutions and banks are among those industries that
have relatively complete and accurate data and have first employed
advanced analytic techniques on their data. Typical cases include
stock investment, loan payment prediction, credit approval,
bankruptcy prediction, and fraud detection.

Classification
 Classification is one of most extensively used data mining methods in
finance and banking. It can be considered as a two- or three-step
process.
 In a two-step process, the first step constructs classification model based
on historic data and the second step applies the classification model to
unknown data to predict their class labels.
 A three-step process adds a model adjustment step between model
construction and model usage to adapt the model better to data.
 Classification has wide applications, such as marketing promotion, credit
card portfolio management, credit approval, network intrusion
detection, and fraud detection.

Analysis Techniques
 Traditionally, discriminant analysis, linear and logistic regression,
integer programming, decision trees, expert systems, neural
networks, and dynamic models are commonly used techniques in
finance and banking applications.
 Relatively few mathematical programming tools have been
explored and applied to finance and banking analysis.

Examples
 German credit risk dataset from UCI Machine Learning databases
 Description: Personal information (e.g., credit history, employment status, age,
and housing). It contains 1000 records (700 Normal and 300 Bad) and24 variables.
 Objective: Predict the credit risk of these records.

 Australian credit approval dataset from See5
 Description: It has 690 records (383 Normal and 307 Bad) and 15 variables.
 Objective: This dataset concerns about credit card applicants' status: either good
or bad.

 Japanese firm bankruptcy set
 Description: Bankrupt (bad) sample Japanese firms (37) and nonbankrupt (normal)
sample Japanese firms (111) from 1989 to 1999 and each record has 13 variables.
 Objective: classify bankrupt and non-bankrupt firms.

Examples...
 These three datasets represent different problems in finance and
banking.
 For comparison purpose, the results show a comparison among five
classification methods
 MCQP (Multiple Criteria Quadratic Programming)
 SPSS linear discriminant analysis (LDA),
 DecisionTree based See5
 SVM light
 LibSVM

Results
 German
dataset
 Objective:
Predict the
credit risk of
these
records.

Results
 Australian
dataset
 Objective:
 credit card
applicants'
status

Results
 Japanese firm
 Objective:
 classify
bankrupt and
nonbankrupt
firms

Personal Credit Management
 The most commonly used methods in predicting credit card defaulters
are credit scoring models. Based on their applications in credit
management, the scoring models can be classified into two categories.
1. The first category concerns about application scores which can help to
decide whether or not to issue credit to a new credit applicant.
2. The second category concerns behavior scores which can help to
forecast future behavior of an existing account for risk analysis.
 "raising or lowering the credit limit;
 how the account should be treated with regard to promotional or marketing
decisions
 Ilegal practice account

Example
 Data set from First Data Corporation (FDC), the largest credit card service industry in the world.
The raw data came originally from a major US bank which is one of FDC's clients.
 It contains 3,589 records and 102 variables (38 original variables and 64 derived variables)
describing cardholders' behaviors.
 The data were collected from June 1995 to December 1995 (seven months) and the
cardholders were from twenty-eight states in USA. This dataset has been used as a classic
working dataset in FDC for various data analyses to support the bank's business intelligence.
 Each record has a class label to indicate its credit status: either Good or Bad. Bad indicates a
bankrupt credit card account and Good indicates a good status account.
 The 38 original variables can be divided into four categories: balance, purchase, payment, cash
advance, in addition to related variables.
 The category variables represent raw data of previous six or seven consecutive months. The
related variables include interest charges, date of last payment, times of cash advance, and
account open date

Example...
 OBJECTIVE
 To produce a "black list" of the credit cardholders.
 This means we seek a classifier that can identify as many Bad records as
possible. This strategy is a basic one in credit card business intelligence.
Theoretically speaking, we shall first construct a number of classifiers and
then choose one more Bad records.

Procedure
Data cleaning

Data
transformation

Model formulation and
classification

Each record is predicted
as Good or Bad

Classification accuracy

Results

Three-class formulation




The reason to separate credit card-holder behavior into multi-class is to
meet the needs of advanced credit card portfolio management.
Comparing with two-class separation, multi-class method enlarges the
difference between "Good" and "Bad" cardholders behavior. This
enlargement increases not only the accuracy of separation, but also
efficiency of credit card portfolio management.
For example, by considering the number of months where the account
has been over-limit during the previous two years, we can define
"Good" as the cardholders have less than 3 times over-limit; "Normal"
as 4­12 times over-limit, and "Bad" as 13 or more times over-limit. By
using the prediction distribution for each behavior class and inner
relationship between these clases, credit card issuers can establish
their credit limit policies for various cardholders.

Procedure
Data cleaning

Data
transformation

Model formulation and
classification

Each record is predicted
as Good , Bad, Normal

Classification accuracy

Results
 Based on the two-class MCLP model, a three-class MCLP model can
be developed.
 Three-class separation can use two boundaries, b1 and b2, to
separate class 1 (G1: Bad), class 2 (G2: Normal), and class 3 (G3:
Good). Credit cardholders behaviors are represented as: 1 stands for
class 1 (Bad), 2 stands for class 2 (normal), and 3 stands for class 3
(Good).
 The cumulative distributions show that class 1 (Bad) has the least
percentage in the whole sample, while class 3 (Good) contains the
majority of credit cardholders. class 2 (Normal) is located between
classes 1 and 3. The separation of three classes is satisfactory.

Four class classification
 A four-class model has three boundaries, b1, b2, and b3, to separate
four classes.
 Each class is represented by a symbol as follows:
 ­ G1 stands for (Bankrupt charge-off account),
 ­ G2 stands for (Non-bankrupt charge-off account),
 ­ G3 stands for (Delinquent account), and
 ­ G4 stands for (Current account).

Procedure
Data cleaning

Data
transformation

Model formulation and
classification

Classification
accuracy

Results
 When applying the resulting classifier to predict the verifying data set,
we can predict the verifying set by the classifier as
 G1 for 43.4% (23/53),
 G2 for 51% (84/165),
 G3 for 28% (156/557) and
 G4 for 68% (2872/4225).
 The predicted KS values are
 36.3 for G1 vs. G2,
 21.6 for G2 vs. G3 and
 50.7 for G3 vs. G4.

Results
 In multi-group classification, a better result will be achieved in the
separation between certain two groups. According to the definition of
group and data attributes, the best KS score usually appears in the
separation between the first group and second group or the separation
between the last group and other groups. In the model, the last group is
defined as individuals with perfect credit performance and other groups
are defined as individuals who have some stains in their credit histories.
 As a result, the separations indicated that the distance between the last
group (Good) and other groups is larger and a better KS score for that
separation. It means that in practice it is easier to catch good ones or bad
ones, but it is much more difficult to discriminant different levels of
credit performance in between.

Insurance fraud
 When someone provides false information to an insurance company
in order to gain something of value that he or she would not have
received if the truth had been told, they've committed insurance
fraud.

Health insurance fraud detection
 The data are from a US insurance company and provide
information about policy types, claim/audit, policy producer, and
client. The dataset has over 18,000 records with 103 variables. The
variables include a mixture of numeric, categorical, and date
types. Each record has a target variable indicates the class label:
either Normal or Abnormal. Abnormal indicates potential fraud
claims.

Results
Ensemble: chi-square, entropy reduction, and Gini reduction

Naïve Bayes classification results

MCLP classification result

Derechos Reservados 2018 Tecnológico de Monterrey
Prohibida la reproducción total o parcial de esta obra
sin expresa autorización del Tecnológico de Monterrey.

