The Physical Implementation of Quantum Computation
Reading Report
Nisim Hurst A01012491
Friday 10 August 2018
Abstract
The chapter was written by Dr. David DiVincenzo [1] while working at IMB research center. It
describes several requirements that he and his coworkers were discussing to be properly included in the
implementation as part of the definition of a quantum computer.
Hypothesis and evidence
The main hypothesis of the article is that postulates of quantum computation are sufficient to start deriving
a set of physical requirements for materializing a quantum computer implementation.
Those requirements are deemed indispensable but not in an axiomatic way. Instead, evidence derived
from the mathematical postulates of quantum mechanics and then presented in strict order. Also, some
implementations are called into question by discussing pros and cons of each.
Contribution
The article gives a brief and generic introduction to quantum computing. However, its main contribution are
the 5+2 physical requirements of quantum computation. Each of those enumerates first a brief introduction
to the related mathematical postulates and then gives a complete study of the state of the art around options
for the implementation. Since each can be considered different study over disjoint postulates, they are by
themselves worth of a section for explanation:
The first requirement maps to the first postulate, i.e. it maps the definition of a qubit. Namely, it requires a well
characterizable physical translation of the two-level quantum system. The author defines well characterized
as the ability to accurately know all the parameters of the system namely the internal Hamiltonian and
couplings to other states and to external fields. Photons,
The second requirement is the ability to prepare qubits with zeroes. This requirement is important to initialize
computation and to allow error correction. The author enumerates two approaches: cooled when reached the
desired state or projected.
A third requirement is longer decoherence times than the gate operation time. Understand decoherence as
the process a qubit suffers when interacting with its environment and losses its meaningful characteristics.
Decoherence time must be long enough to allow quantum properties to be used and measured. It also affects
error correcting procedures.
The fourth requirement is a set of universal quantum gates (alias unitary operators) and directly relates
with the system’s evolution postulate. First we need to be able to identify the physical Hamiltonians that
produce the unitary operators. However this Hamiltonians must allow interactions to be turned on and off.
Also the interactions of the two qubits must avoid overlaps. Interactions between the quantum computer and
the control devices should avoid entanglement. Fully parallel unentangled operation is needed for the error
correction procedure.
The fifth requirement maps to the quantum measurement postulate, it is the ability to measure the qubits. A
probability is needed to measure a 0 state or a 1 state. Even though this probability would be not so high, it
can be extended by running the measurements several times.
1
