CS4014 Applied Mathematics November 12, 2018. ­ Part 2
Dr. Viacheslav Kalashnikov kalash@itesm.mx

Contents
 Unit I. Elements of Set Theory ­ 3 hrs  Unit II. Elements of Mathematical Logic ­ 6 hrs  Unit III. Elements of Probability Theory ­ 9 hrs  Unit IV. Elements of Mathematical Statistics ­ 9 hrs  Unit V. Elements of Linear Algebra ­ 9 hrs  Unit VI. Elements of Optimization Theory ­ 9 hrs  Exams ­ 3 hrs
Total course volume: 48 hrs

Textbooks
Hunter, D. (2010). Essentials of Discrete Mathematics. Boston, Massachusetts: The Jones & Bartlett Learning International Series in Mathematics. Golub, G.H. & Van Loan, C.F. (2013). Matrix Computations (4ª ed.). Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Studies in Mathematical Sciences. Kalashnikov, V.V., Dempe, S. & Kalashnykova, N.I. (2012). Operations Research and Bilevel Programming. Monterrey, México: Editorial Digital, ITESM. Retrieved from https://www.amazon.com/Operations-Research-Programming-Vyacheslav-Kalashnikovebook/dp/B00QMTSUV4/157-0191784-4181774?ie=UTF8&ref_=rdr_kindle_ext_tmb#nav-subnav

Reference books
Makinson, D. (2012). Sets, Logic and Maths for Computing. New York: Springer. Epp, S.S. (2010). Discrete Mathematics with Applications. Boston, Massachusetts: Brooks/Cole Cengage Learning. Gersting, J.L. (2015). Mathematical Structures for Computer Science. New York: W.H. Freeman.

Textbooks
To acquire the electronic textbook V.V. Kalashnikov, S. Dempe, N.I. Kalashnykova, Operations Research and Bilevel Programming. Editorial Digital, ITESM, Campus Monterrey, 2012, one need enter the page:
https://www.editorialdigitaltec.com/index.php?route=product/product&path=63_75&product_id=147 https://www.editorialdigitaltec.com/materialadicional/Adquisicion_eBooks.pdf https://www.amazon.com/Operations-Research-Programming-Vyacheslav-Kalashnikovebook/dp/B00QMTSUV4/ref=sr_1_1?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1448516767&sr=11&keywords=Operations+research+and+bilevel+programming
There are various ways of buying it including by a credit card, bank order, cash, etc. See the letter from the Editorial Digital in the today class folder.

Textbooks
Please remember that, before you download your eBook, you should have installed the Adobe Reader X and the plugin File Open on your computer. Moreover, remember that you can see your eBook only on the computer to which it has been downloaded, and it is compatible with neither tablets like iPad/Kindle nor mobile/smartphones.
However, a new version of this eBook for iPads is also available now at amazon.com at a very low price (ca. USD $08.40).

Monthly Exams

Midterm Exam: October 16, 2018;
10:00 a.m.

Final Exam: November 22, 2018;
10:00 a.m.

Consultation Hours: Monday and Friday
CIAP-528D 10:30-11:30 a.m.

Final Score Formula
Final Score  0.35  MTE  0.35  FE+ +0.20  LA+0.10  HW,
where MTE  MidTerm Exam; FE  Final Exam; LA = Presentation LA Topic; HW = Average of HW Grades.

Hypotheses Verification
Linear Regression
Agenda ANOVA Tests (Analysis of Variances)

Reading
Please read:  Anderson, David R. et al. (2011), Chapter 8 (Interval Estimation), pp.
308 ­ 348; and Chapter 9 (Hypothesis Tests), pp. 348 ­ 405  Sheldon M. Ross (2004), Chapter 7 (Parameter Estimation), pp. 229
­ 277; and Chapter 8 (Hypothesis Testing), pp. 291 ­ 334

STATISTICS IN PRACTICE
JOHN MORRELL & COMPANY
CINCINNATI, OHIO John Morrell & Company, which began in England in 1827, is considered the oldest continuously operating meat manufacturer in the United States. It is a wholly owned and independently managed subsidiary of Smithfield Foods, Smithfield, Virginia.

STATISTICS IN PRACTICE
 John Morrell & Company offers an extensive product line of processed meats and fresh pork to consumers under 13 regional brands including John Morrell, E-Z-Cut, Tobin's First Prize, Dinner Bell, Hunter, Kretschmar, Rath, Rodeo, Shenson, Farmers Hickory Brand, Iowa Quality, and Peyton's. Each regional brand enjoys high brand recognition and loyalty among consumers.
 Market research at Morrell provides management with up-to-date information on the company's various products and how the products compare with competing brands of similar products.

STATISTICS IN PRACTICE
 A recent study compared a Beef Pot Roast made by Morrell to similar beef products from two major competitors.
 In the three-product comparison test, a sample of consumers was used to indicate how the products rated in terms of taste, appearance, aroma, and overall preference.
 One research question concerned whether the Beef Pot Roast made by Morrell was the preferred choice of more than 50% of the consumer population.
 Letting p indicate the population proportion preferring Morrell's product, the hypothesis test for the research question is as follows:

STATISTICS IN PRACTICE

 H0: p  .50  Ha: p > .50  pThroeduncutllishleyspsotthhaensisorHe0quianldtioca5t0e%s. the preference for Morrell's



If the sample data support

thhyrpeoet-hperosdisuHcta,

Morrell will comparison,

rejecting draw the

Hre0sienarfachvocroonfcltuhseioanlttehrantatinivea

their Beef Pot Roast is preferred by

more than 50% of the consumer population.

STATISTICS IN PRACTICE

 In an independent taste test study using a sample of 224 consumers in Cincinnati, Milwaukee, and Los Angeles, 150 consumers selected the Beef Pot Roast made by Morrell as the preferred product.

 Using statistical hypothesis testing procedures, the null

hypothesis H0 was rejected.



The study conclusion

tphraotvtidheedMsotrarteislltipcraol deuvcitdiesnpcreefseurprepdorbtyinmg oHrea

and than

the 50%

of the consumer population.

STATISTICS IN PRACTICE
 The point estimate of the population proportion was 150/224 = .67.
 Thus, the sample data provided support for a food magazine advertisement showing that in a three-product taste comparison, Beef Pot Roast made by Morrell was "preferred 2 to 1 over the competition."
 In this class we will discuss how to formulate hypotheses and how to conduct tests like the one used by Morrell. Through the analysis of sample data, we will be able to determine whether a hypothesis should or should not be rejected.

HYPOTHESIS TESTING
 In the previous classes we showed how a sample could be used to develop point and interval estimates of population parameters.
 In this lecture we continue the discussion of statistical inference by showing how hypothesis testing can be used to determine whether a statement about the value of a population parameter should or should not be rejected.
 In hypothesis testing we begin by making a tentative assumption about a population parameter.
 This tentative assumption is called the null hypothesis and is denoted by H0.

HYPOTHESIS TESTING
 We then define another hypothesis, called the alternative hypothesis, which is the opposite of what is stated in the null hypothesis. The alternative hypothesis is denoted by Ha.
 The hypothesis testing procedure uses data from a sample to test the two competing statements indicated by H0 and Ha.
 This part of our course shows how hypothesis tests can be conducted about a population mean and a population proportion.
 We begin by providing examples that illustrate approaches to developing null and alternative hypotheses.

DEVELOPING NULL AND ALTERNATIVE HYPOTHESES
 It is not always obvious how the null and alternative hypotheses should be formulated. Care must be taken to structure the hypotheses appropriately so that the hypothesis testing conclusion provides the information the researcher or decision maker wants.
 The context of the situation is very important in determining how the hypotheses should be stated. All hypothesis testing applications involve collecting a sample and using the sample results to provide evidence for drawing a conclusion.
 Good questions to consider when formulating the null and alternative hypotheses are, What is the purpose of collecting the sample? What conclusions are we hoping to make?

DEVELOPING NULL AND ALTERNATIVE HYPOTHESES



In the introduction, we stated tentative assumption about a

ptohpaut lathtieonnuplal rhaympeottehressiuscHh0

is as

a a

population mean or a population proportion.



Tohf ewahlatetrinsasttivaetehdypinotthheesinsuHllahisypaosthtaetseism. eInntstohmate

is the opposite situations it is

easier to identify the alternative hypothesis first and then develop

the null hypothesis. In other situations it is easier to identify the

null hypothesis first and then develop the alternative hypothesis.

 We will illustrate these situations in the following examples.

The Alternative Hypothesis as a Research Hypothesis
 Many applications of hypothesis testing involve an attempt to gather evidence in support of a research hypothesis. In these situations, it is often best to begin with the alternative hypothesis and make it the conclusion that the researcher hopes to support.
 Consider a particular automobile that currently attains a fuel efficiency of 24 miles per gallon in city driving. A product research group has developed a new fuel injection system designed to increase the miles-per-gallon rating.
 The group will run controlled tests with the new fuel injection system looking for statistical support for the conclusion that the new fuel injection system provides more miles per gallon than the current system.

The Alternative Hypothesis as a Research Hypothesis
 Several new fuel injection units will be manufactured, installed in test automobiles, and subjected to research-controlled driving conditions.
 The sample mean miles per gallon for these automobiles will be computed and used in a hypothesis test to determine if it can be concluded that the new system provides more than 24 miles per gallon.
 In terms of the population mean miles per gallon , the research hypothesis  > 24 becomes the alternative hypothesis.

The Alternative Hypothesis as a Research Hypothesis

 Since the current system provides an average or mean of 24 miles per gallon, we will make the tentative assumption that the new system is not any better than the current system and choose   24 as the null hypothesis.

 The null and alternative hypotheses are:

 H0:   24

 Ha:  > 24

 If the sample results lead to the conclusion inference can be made that Ha :  > 24 is true.

to

reject

H0,

the

The Alternative Hypothesis as a Research Hypothesis

 The researchers have the statistical support to state that the new fuel injection system increases the mean number of miles per gallon.

 The production of automobiles with the new fuel injection system should be considered.



However, cannot be

if the sample results lead to the conclusion rejected, the researchers cannot conclude that

tthheatneHw0

fuel injection system is better than the current system.

 Production of automobiles with the new fuel injection system on the basis of better gas mileage cannot be justified. Perhaps more research and further testing can be conducted.

The Alternative Hypothesis as a Research Hypothesis
 Successful companies stay competitive by developing new products, new methods, new systems, and the like, that are better than what is currently available.
 Before adopting something new, it is desirable to conduct research to determine if there is statistical support for the conclusion that the new approach is indeed better. In such cases, the research hypothesis is stated as the alternative hypothesis.
 For example, a new teaching method is developed that is believed to be better than the current method. The alternative hypothesis is that the new method is better. The null hypothesis is that the new method is no better than the old method.

The Alternative Hypothesis as a Research Hypothesis
 A new sales force bonus plan is developed in an attempt to increase sales. The alternative hypothesis is that the new bonus plan increases sales. The null hypothesis is that the new bonus plan does not increase sales.
 A new drug is developed with the goal of lowering blood pressure more than an existing drug. The alternative hypothesis is that the new drug lowers blood pressure more than the existing drug. The null hypothesis is that the new drug does not provide lower blood pressure than the existing drug.

The Alternative Hypothesis as a Research Hypothesis

In each case, rejection of the null statistical support for the research

hypothesis hypothesis.

H0

provides

We will see many examples of hypothesis tests in research situations such as these throughout this part and other parts of the course as well.

The Null Hypothesis as an Assumption to Be Challenged
Of course, not all hypothesis tests involve research hypotheses. In the following discussion we consider applications of hypothesis testing where we begin with a belief or an assumption that a statement about the value of a population parameter is true. We will then use a hypothesis test to challenge the assumption and determine if there is statistical evidence to conclude that the assumption is incorrect. In these situations, it is helpful to develop the null hypothesis first.

The Null Hypothesis as an Assumption to Be Challenged

aTbhoeuntutlhl ehyvpaoluteheosfisthHe0peoxppurelastsioesn

the belief or parameter.

assumption

The alternative hypothesis assumption is incorrect.

Ha

is

that

the

belief

or

As an example, consider the situation of a manufacturer of soft drink products. The label on a soft drink bottle states that it contains 67.6 fluid ounces. We consider the label correct provided the population mean filling weight for the bottles is at least 67.6 fluid ounces.

The Null Hypothesis as an Assumption to Be Challenged Without any reason to believe otherwise, we would give the manufacturer the benefit of the doubt and assume that the statement provided on the label is correct. Thus, in a hypothesis test about the population mean fluid weight per bottle, we would begin with the assumption that the label is correct and state the null hypothesis as   67.6. The challenge to this assumption would imply that the label is incorrect and the bottles are being underfilled. This challenge would be stated as the alternative hypothesis  <67.6.

The Null Hypothesis as an Assumption to Be Challenged

 Thus, the null and alternative hypotheses are:

H0:   67.6 Ha:  < 67.6  A government agency with the responsibility for validating manufacturing labels could select a sample of soft drink bottles, compute the sample mean filling weight, and use the sample results to test the preceding hypotheses.

 If the sample results lead to the conclusion inference that Ha:  < 67.6 is true can be made.

to

reject

H0,

the

 With this statistical support, the agency is justified in concluding

that the label is incorrect and underfilling of the bottles is occurring.

The Null Hypothesis as an Assumption to Be Challenged

 Appropriate action to force the manufacturer to comply with labeling standards would be considered.

 However, if assumption

tthhaetstahmepmlearneusfualctstuirnedri'csatlaebHel0incganisnoctorbreecrtejceactnendo,tthbee

rejected. With this conclusion, no action would be taken.

 Let us now consider a variation of the soft drink bottle filling example by viewing the same situation from the manufacturer's point of view. The bottle-filling operation has been designed to fill soft drink bottles with 67.6 fluid ounces as stated on the label. The company does not want to underfill the containers because that could result in an underfilling complaint from customers or, perhaps, a government agency.

The Null Hypothesis as an Assumption to Be Challenged
 However, the company does not want to overfill containers either because putting more soft drink than necessary into the containers would be an unnecessary cost.
 The company's goal would be to adjust the bottle-filling operation so that the population mean filling weight per bottle is exactly 67.6 fluid ounces as specified on the label.
 Although this is the company's goal, from time to time any production process can get out of adjustment.
 If this occurs in our example, underfilling or overfilling of the soft drink bottles will occur.

The Null Hypothesis as an Assumption to Be Challenged
 In either case, the company would like to know about it in order to correct the situation by readjusting the bottle-filling operation to the designed 67.6 fluid ounces.
 In a hypothesis testing application, we would again begin with the assumption that the production process is operating correctly and state the null hypothesis as  = 67.6 fluid ounces.
 The alternative hypothesis that challenges this assumption is that   67.6, which indicates either overfilling or underfilling is occurring.

The Null Hypothesis as an Assumption to Be Challenged

 The null and alternative hypotheses for the manufacturer's hypothesis test are:

H0:  = 67.6

Ha:   67.6

 Suppose that the soft drink manufacturer uses a quality control

procedure to periodically select a sample of bottles from the filling

operation and computes the sample mean filling weight per bottle. If the

sample results lead to the that Ha:   67.6 is true.

conclusion

to

reject

H0,

the

inference

is

made

 We conclude that the bottles are not being filled properly and the

production process should be adjusted to restore the population mean

to 67.6 fluid ounces per bottle.

The Null Hypothesis as an Assumption to Be Challenged

 However, if assumption

the sample results indicate that the manufacturer's

bHo0ttclaennfiolltinbge

rejected, the operation is

functioning properly cannot be rejected.

 In this case, no further action would be taken and the production operation would continue to run.

 The two preceding forms of the soft drink manufacturing hypothesis test show that the null and alternative hypotheses may vary depending upon the point of view of the researcher or decision maker.

 To correctly formulate hypotheses it is important to understand the context of the situation and structure the hypotheses to provide the information the researcher or decision maker wants.

Summary of Forms for Null and Alternative Hypotheses

 The hypothesis tests in this lecture involve two population parameters: the population mean and the population proportion.

 Depending on the situation, hypothesis tests about a population parameter may take one of three forms: two use inequalities in the null hypothesis; the third uses an equality in the null hypothesis.



For the

hypothesis tests involving a hypothesized value and we

population mean, must choose one

we of

let the

f0oldloewnointge

three forms for the hypothesis test.

H0:   0 Ha:  < 0

H0:   0 Ha:  > 0

H0:  = 0 Ha:   0

Summary of Forms for Null and Alternative Hypotheses

 For reasons that will be clear later, the first two forms are called one-tailed tests.

 The third form is called a two-tailed test.

 In many situations, the choice judgment is necessary to select

of the

Hp0roapnedr

fHoarmis.

not obvious and However, as the

preceding forms show, the equality part of the expression (either ,

, or =) always appears in the null hypothesis.



In selecting alternative

the proper hypothesis

form of is often

Hw0 haantd

tHhae ,

keep in test is

mind that the attempting to

establish. Hence, asking whether the user is looking for evidence to

support  > 0 ,  < 0 , or   0 will help determine Ha.

Exercise 4.1.

 The manager of the Danvers-Hilton Resort Hotel stated that the mean guest bill for a weekend is $600 or less. A member of the hotel's accounting staff noticed that the total charges for guest bills have been increasing in recent months. The accountant will use a sample of weekend guest bills to test the manager's claim.

a. Which form of the hypotheses should be used to test the manager's claim? Explain.

H0:   600

H0:   600

H0:  = 600

Ha:  < 600

Ha:  > 600

Ha:   600

b. What conclusion is appropriate when H0 cannot be rejected?

c. What conclusion is appropriate when H0 can be rejected?

Exercise 4.2.
 The manager of an automobile dealership is considering a new bonus plan designed to increase sales volume. Currently, the mean sales volume is 14 automobiles per month. The manager wants to conduct a research study to see whether the new bonus plan increases sales volume.
 To collect data on the plan, a sample of sales personnel will be allowed to sell under the new bonus plan for a one-month period.
a. Develop the null and alternative hypotheses most appropriate for this situation. b. Comment on the conclusion when H0 cannot be rejected. c. Comment on the conclusion when H0 can be rejected.

HOMEWORK 4.1
 4.1.1. A production line operation is designed to fill cartons with laundry detergent to a mean weight of 32 ounces. A sample of cartons is periodically selected and weighed to determine whether underfilling or overfilling is occurring.

 If the sample data lead to a conclusion of underfilling or overfilling, the production line will be shut down and adjusted to obtain proper filling.

a. Formulate the null and alternative hypotheses that will help in deciding whether to shut down and adjust the production line.

b. Comment rejected.

on

the

conclusion

and

the

decision

when

H0

cannot

be

c. Comment rejected.

on

the

conclusion

and

the

decision

when

H0

can

be

HOMEWORK 4.1 (cont-ed)
 4.1.2. Because of high production-changeover time and costs, a director of
manufacturing must convince management that a proposed manufacturing method reduces costs before the new method can be implemented. The current production method operates with a mean cost of $220 per hour. A research study will measure the cost of the new method over a sample production period. a. Develop the null and alternative hypotheses most appropriate for this study. b. Comment on the conclusion and the decision when H0 cannot be rejected. c. Comment on the conclusion and the decision when H0 can be rejected.

Type I and Type II Errors
 The null and alternative hypotheses are competing statements about the population. Either the null htryupeo, tbhuetsnisotHb0 oistht.rue or the alternative hypothesis Ha is
 Ideally the hypothesis testing procedure should lead to the wachceenptHaanicsetroufeH. 0 when H0 is true and the rejection of H0
 Unfortunately, the correct conclusions are not always possible. Because hypothesis tests are based on sample information, we must allow for the possibility of errors. Table 4.1 illustrates the two kinds of errors that can be made in hypothesis testing.

TABLE 4.1 ERRORS AND CORRECT CONCLUSIONS IN HYPOTHESIS TESTING

Type I and Type II Errors

 The first row of Table 4.1 shows what can happen if the

conclusion correct.

is

to

accept

H0.

If

H0

is

true,

this

conclusion

is



However, accept H0

wifhHeanisittirsufea,lswe.e

make

a

Type

II

error;

that

is,

we

 The second row of Table 4.1 shows what can happen if the

conclusion is error; that is,

to reject we reject

HH00.wIfheHn0

is true, we it is true.

make

a

Type

I

 However, if Ha is true, rejecting H0 is correct.

Type I and Type II Errors
 Recall the hypothesis testing illustration discussed in the previous class in which an automobile product research group developed a new fuel injection system designed to increase the miles-per-gallon rating of a particular automobile.
 With the current model obtaining an average of 24 miles per gallon, the hypothesis test was formulated as follows. H0:   24 Ha:  > 24

Type I and Type II Errors

 rTehseeaarltcehrenrastiavreehlyopooktinhgesifso,rHsaa:mp>le24ev,idinednicceatetos

that the support

the conclusion that the population mean miles per gallon

with the new fuel injection system is greater than 24.



In this application, the Type I error of true corresponds to the researchers

crleajiemctininggtHh0atwthheenniet wis

system improves the miles-per-gallon rating ( > 24) when

in fact the new system is not any better than the current

system.

Type I and Type II Errors



In contrast, the corresponds to

Type the

rIeI seerraorcrhoefrasccceopntcilnugdiHn0gwthheant

it is the

false new

system is not any better than the current system (  24)

when in fact the new system improves miles-per-gallon

performance.

 For the miles-per-gallon rating hypothesis test, the null

ahsypaontheeqsuiasliistyH; 0t:hat

24. Suppose the null hypothesis is true is,  = 24. The probability of making a

Type I error when the null hypothesis is true as an equality

is called the level of significance.

Type I and Type II Errors

 Thus, for the miles-per-gallon rating hypothesis test, the

level of when 

significance = 24.

is

the

probability

of

rejecting

H0:





24

 Because of the importance of this concept, we now restate the definition of level of significance.

Type I and Type II Errors
LEVEL OF SIGNIFICANCE  The level of significance is the probability of making a Type
I error when the null hypothesis is true as an equality.  The Greek symbol  (alpha) is used to denote the level of
significance, and common choices for  are .05 and .01.  In practice, the person responsible for the hypothesis test
specifies the level of significance.  By selecting , that person is controlling the probability of
making a Type I error.

Type I and Type II Errors

 If the cost of making a Type I error is high, small values of  are preferred.

 If the cost of making a Type I error is not too high, larger values of  are typically used.

 Applications of hypothesis testing that only control for the Type I error are called significance tests. Many applications of hypothesis testing are of this type.

 Although most applications of hypothesis testing control

for the probability of making a Type I error, they do not

always control for the probability of making a Type II error.

Hence, if we decide to how confident we can be

awcictehptthaHt0d, ewceisiocann. not

determine

Type I and Type II Errors

 Because of the uncertainty associated with making a Type

II error when conducting significance tests, statisticians

usually recommend that we use the statement "do not

reject H0" instead of "accept H0."



Using the statement "do recommendation to withhold

nbootthrjeujdegcmt eHn0t"ancdararcietisont.hIne

effect, by the risk of

not directly accepting making a Type II error.

H0,

the

statistician

avoids

 Whenever the probability of making a Type II error has not

been determined and controlled, we will not make the

satraetpeomsesnibtle":adccoenpottHr0e."jecInt

such H0 or

cases, reject

only H0.

two

conclusions

Type I and Type II Errors

 Although controlling for a Type II error in hypothesis testing is not common, it can be done. Later we will illustrate procedures for determining and controlling the probability of making a Type II error.

 If proper controls have been established for this error,

action based appropriate.

on

the

"accept

H0"

conclusion

can

be

NOTES AND COMMENTS
 Walter Williams, syndicated columnist and professor of economics at George Mason University, points out that the possibility of making a Type I or a Type II error is always present in decision making (The Cincinnati Enquirer, August 14, 2005).
 He notes that the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) runs the risk of making these errors in their drug approval process.
 With a Type I error, the FDA fails to approve a drug that is safe and effective.
 A Type II error means the FDA approves a drug that has unanticipated dangerous side effects. Regardless of the decision made, the possibility of making a costly error cannot be eliminated.

Exercise 4.3.
 Nielsen reported that young men in the United States watch 56.2 minutes of prime-time TV daily (The Wall Street Journal Europe, November 18, 2003).
 A researcher believes that young men in Germany spend more time watching prime-time TV. A sample of German young men will be selected by the researcher and the time they spend watching TV in one day will be recorded. The sample results will be used to test the following null and alternative hypotheses: H0:   56.2 Ha:  > 56.2

Exercise 5.3. (cont-ed)
a. What is the Type I error in this situation? What are the consequences of making this error? b. What is the Type II error in this situation? What are the consequences of making this error?

Exercise 4.4.
 The label on a 3-quart container of orange juice states that the orange juice contains an average of 1 gram of fat or less. Answer the following questions for a hypothesis test that could be used to test the claim on the label.
a. Develop the appropriate null and alternative hypotheses. b. What is the Type I error in this situation? What are the consequences of making this error? c. What is the Type II error in this situation? What are the consequences of making this error?

HOMEWORK 4.2
4.2.1. Carpetland salespersons average $8000 per week in sales. Steve
Contois, the firm's vice president, proposes a compensation plan with new selling incentives. Steve hopes that the results of a trial selling period will enable him to conclude that the compensation plan increases the average sales per salesperson. a. Develop the appropriate null and alternative hypotheses. b. What is the Type I error in this situation? What are the consequences of making this error? c. What is the Type II error in this situation? What are the consequences of making this error?

HOMEWORK 4.2 (cont-ed)
4.2.2. Suppose a new production method will be implemented if a hypothesis
test supports the conclusion that the new method reduces the mean operating cost per hour. a. State the appropriate null and alternative hypotheses if the mean cost for the current production method is $220 per hour. b. What is the Type I error in this situation? What are the consequences of making this error? c. What is the Type II error in this situation? What are the consequences of making this error?

Population Mean:  Known
 In the previous lectures we said that the  known case corresponds to applications in which historical data and/or other information are available that enable us to obtain a good estimate of the population standard deviation prior to sampling.
 In such cases the population standard deviation can, for all practical purposes, be considered known.
 In this class we show how to conduct a hypothesis test about a population mean for the  known case.

Population Mean:  Known
 The methods presented in this class are exact if the sample is selected from a population that is normally distributed.
 In cases where it is not reasonable to assume the population is normally distributed, these methods are still applicable if the sample size is large enough.
 We provide some practical advice concerning the population distribution and the sample size at the end of this class.

One-Tailed Test

One-tailed tests about a population mean take one of the following two forms.

Lower Tail Test

Upper Tail Test

H0:   0 Ha:  < 0

H0:   0 Ha:  > 0

Let us consider an example involving a lower tail test.

One-Tailed Test
The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) periodically conducts statistical studies designed to test the claims that manufacturers make about their products. For example, the label on a large can of Hilltop Coffee states that the can contains 3 pounds of coffee. The FTC knows that Hilltop's production process cannot place exactly 3 pounds of coffee in each can, even if the mean filling weight for the population of all cans filled is 3 pounds per can.

One-Tailed Test
However, as long as the population mean filling weight is at least 3 pounds per can, the rights of consumers will be protected. Thus, the FTC interprets the label information on a large can of coffee as a claim by Hilltop that the population mean filling weight is at least 3 pounds per can. We will show how the FTC can check Hilltop's claim by conducting a lower tail hypothesis test.

One-Tailed Test
The first step is to develop the null and alternative hypotheses for the test. If the population mean filling weight is at least 3 pounds per can, Hilltop's claim is correct. This establishes the null hypothesis for the test. However, if the population mean weight is less than 3 pounds per can, Hilltop's claim is incorrect. This establishes the alternative hypothesis.

One-Tailed Test
With  denoting the population mean filling weight, the null and alternative hypotheses are as follows:
H0:   3 Ha:  < 3 Note that the hypothesized value of the population mean is 0 = 3. sIftathtiestsicaaml epvleiddeantcaeinddoiecsatneotthsautpHpo0 rctatnhneotcobnecrluesjeioctnetdh,atthea label violation has occurred. Hence, no action should be taken against Hilltop.

One-Tailed Test

wHoewweivllecro, nifcltuhdeestahmatptlehedaatltaerinndaticivaetehyHp0octahnesbise, is true.

rejected, Ha:  < 3,

In this case a conclusion of underfilling and a charge of a label violation against Hilltop would be justified.

One-Tailed Test Suppose a sample of 36 cans of coffee is selected and the sample mean is computed as an estimate of the population mean .
xIf the value of the sample mean is less than 3 pounds,
the sample results will cast doubt on the null hypothesis.
xWhat we want to know is how much less than 3 pounds
must be before we would be willing to declare the difference significant and risk making a Type I error by falsely accusing Hilltop of a label violation.

One-Tailed Test A key factor in addressing this issue is the value the decision maker selects for the level of significance. As noted in the preceding slides, the level of significance, denoted by , is the probability of making a Type I error by rejecting H0 when the null hypothesis is true as an equality. The decision maker must specify the level of significance. If the cost of making a Type I error is high, a small value should be chosen for the level of significance.

One-Tailed Test
If the cost is not high, a larger value is more appropriate. In the Hilltop Coffee study, the director of the FTC's testing program made the following statement: "If the company is meeting its weight specifications at  = 3, I do not want to take action against them. But, I am willing to risk a 1% chance of making such an error." From the director's statement, we set the level of significance for the hypothesis test at  = .01. Thus, we must design the hypothesis test so that the probability of making a Type I error when  = 3 is .01.

One-Tailed Test
For the Hilltop Coffee study, by developing the null and alternative hypotheses and specifying the level of significance for the test, we carry out the first two steps required in conducting every hypothesis test.
We are now ready to perform the third step of hypothesis testing: collect the sample data and compute the value of what is called a test statistic.

Test Statistic
 For the Hilltop Coffee study, previous FTC tests show that the population standard deviation can be assumed known with a value of  = .18.
 In addition, these tests also show that the population of filling weights can be assumed to have a normal distribution.
 From the study of sampling distributions in our previous class we know that if the population from which we are
xsampling is normally distributed, the sampling distribution
of will also be normally distributed.

Test Statistic

x Thus, for the Hilltop Coffee study, the sampling

distribution of

is normally distributed.

 With a known value of  = .18 and a sample size of n = 36,

xFigure 9.1 shows the sampling distribution of

when

the null hypothesis is true as an equality; that is, when

 = 0 = 3.
x Note that the standard error of

is given by

x




n



0.18 36



0.03.

Test Statistic

x Because the sampling distribution of

is normally

distributed, the sampling distribution of

z



x  0 x



x 3 0.03

x is a standard normal distribution. A value of z = -1 means

that the value of

is one standard error below the

xhypothesized value of the mean, a value of z = -2 means

that the value of

is two standard errors below the

hypothesized value of the mean, and so on.

OFIFGURxE

4.1 SAMPLING DISTRIBUTION FOR THE HILLTOP COFFEE

STUDY WHEN THE NULL HYPOTHESIS

IS TRUE AS AN EQUALITY (  = 3)

Test Statistic
 We can use the standard normal probability table to find the lower tail probability corresponding to any z value.
 For instance, the lower tail area at z = - 3.00 is .0013. Hence, the probability of obtaining a value of z that is three or more standard errors below the mean is .0013.
 As a result, the probability of obtaining a value of that is 3 or more standard errors below the hypothesized population mean 0 = 3 is also .0013.
 Such a result is unlikely if the null hypothesis is true.

Test Statistic

 For hypothesis tests about a population mean in the 

known case, we use z as a test statistic to

tdheetesrtmanindearwdhneotrhmeralxranddeovmiatveasrfiarobmle

the hypothesized value of  enough to justify rejecting the

null hypothesis.

 With  x   n the test statistic is as follows.
TEST STATISTIC FOR HYPOTHESIS TESTS ABOUT A

POPULATION MEAN:  KNOWN

z  x  0 . n

(5.5)

Test Statistic
 The key question for a lower tail test is, How small must the test statistic z be before we choose to reject the null hypothesis?
 Two approaches can be used to answer this question: the pvalue approach and the critical value approach.
 p-value approach The p-value approach uses the value of the test statistic z to compute a probability called a p-value.
p-VALUE  A p-value is a probability that provides a measure of the
evidence against the null hypothesis provided by the sample. Smaller p-values indicate more evidence against H0.

Test Statistic
 The p-value is used to determine whether the null hypothesis should be rejected.
 Let us see how the p-value is computed and used. The value of the test statistic is used to compute the p-value.
 The method used depends on whether the test is a lower tail, an upper tail, or a two-tailed test.
 For a lower tail test, the p-value is the probability of obtaining a value for the test statistic as small as or smaller than that provided by the sample.

Test Statistic
 Thus, to compute the p-value for the lower tail test in the  known case, we must find the area under the standard normal curve for values of z  the value of the test statistic.
 After computing the p-value, we must then decide whether it is small enough to reject the null hypothesis; as we will show, this decision involves comparing the p-value to the level of significance.
 Let us now compute the p-value for the Hilltop Coffee lower tail test. Suppose the sample of 36 Hilltop coffee cans provides a sample mean of 2.92 pounds.
 Is 2.92 small enough to cause us to reject H0?

p-value Approach

 Because this is a lower tail test, the p-value is the area under the standard normal curve for values of z  the value of the test statistic.

 Using x  2.92,  = .18, and n = 36, we compute the value of the test statistic z:

z



x  0 n



2.92  3 0.18 36





0.08 0.03



2.67.

 Thus, the p-value is the probability that the test statistic z is less than or equal to 2.67 (the area under the standard normal curve to the left of the test statistic).

p-value Approach
 Using the standard normal probability table (or the online calculator, or the EXCEL function NORM.DIST), we find that the lower tail area at z = -2.67 is .0038.
 Figure 9.2 shows that x = 2.92 corresponds to z = - 2.67 and
a p-value =.0038.  This p-value indicates a small probability of obtaining a
sample mean of x = 2.92 (and a test statistic of - 2.67) or
smaller when sampling from a population with  = 3.

FIGURE 4.2 p-VALUE FOR THE HILLTOP
xCOFFEE STUDY WHEN = 2.92 AND
z = -2.67

p-value Approach
 This p-value does not provide much support for the null hypothesis, but is it small enough to cause us to reject H0?
 The answer depends upon the level of significance for the test.
 As noted previously, the director of the FTC's testing program selected a value of .01 for the level of significance. The selection of  = .01 means that the director is willing to tolerate a probability of .01 of rejecting the null hypothesis when it is true as an equality (0 = 3).

p-value Approach

 The sample of 36 coffee cans in the Hilltop Coffee study resulted in a p-value =.0038, which means that the
probability of obtaining a value of x = 2.92 or less when the
null hypothesis is true as an equality is .0038.



Because .0038 Therefore, we

is less than or equal to find sufficient statistical

 = .01, we evidence to

reject reject

tHh0e.

null hypothesis at the .01 level of significance.

 We can now state the general rule for determining whether the null hypothesis can be rejected when using the p-value approach. For a level of significance , the rejection rule using the p-value approach is as follows:

p-value Approach

REJECTION RULE USING p-VALUE

Reject H0 if p-value  .  In the Hilltop Coffee test, the p-value of .0038 resulted in the
rejection of the null hypothesis.

 Although the basis for making the rejection decision involves

a comparison of the p-value to the level of significance

specified by the FTC director, the observed p-value of .0038

tmheisanresatshoant,wtehewpo-uvladlureejeisctaHls0ofocralalendy

value of   .0038. For the observed level of

significance.

p-value Approach
Different decision makers may express different opinions concerning the cost of making a Type I error and may choose a different level of significance. By providing the p-value as part of the hypothesis testing results, another decision maker can compare the reported p-value to his or her own level of significance and possibly make a different decision with respect to rejecting H0.

Critical Value Approach
 The critical value approach requires that we first determine a value for the test statistic called the critical value.
 For a lower tail test, the critical value serves as a benchmark for determining whether the value of the test statistic is small enough to reject the null hypothesis.
 It is the value of the test statistic that corresponds to an area of  (the level of significance) in the lower tail of the sampling distribution of the test statistic.
 In other words, the critical value is the largest value of the test statistic that will result in the rejection of the null hypothesis.

Critical Value Approach
 Let us return to the Hilltop Coffee example and see how this approach works.
 In the  known case, the sampling distribution for the test statistic z is a standard normal distribution. Therefore, the critical value is the value of the test statistic that corresponds to an area of  = .01 in the lower tail of a standard normal distribution.
 Using the standard normal probability table, we find that z=-2.33 provides an area of .01 in the lower tail (see Figure 5.3).
 Thus, if the sample results in a value of the test statistic that is less than or equal to -2.33 , the corresponding p-value will be less than or equal to .01; in this case, we should reject the null hypothesis.

FIGURE 4.3 CRITICAL VALUE -2.33 FOR THE HILLTOP COFFEE HYPOTHESIS TEST

Critical Value Approach

 Hence, for the Hilltop Coffee study the critical value rejection rule for a level of significance of .01 is

Reject H0 if z - 2.33.
 In the Hilltop Coffee example,x
z = -2.67.

= 2.92 and the test statistic is

 Because z = -2.67 < -2.33, Hilltop Coffee is underfilling

we can cans.

reject

H0

and

conclude

that

Critical Value Approach
 We can generalize the rejection rule for the critical value approach to handle any level of significance. The rejection rule for a lower tail test follows.
REJECTION RULE FOR A LOWER TAIL TEST: CRITICAL VALUE APPROACH
Reject H0 if z - z , warheearoef-zinisthtehelocwrietrictaalilvoalfuteh;ethstaatnids,artdhenozrvmaaluleditshtraitbuptrioovni.des an

Critical Value Approach
 The p-value approach to hypothesis testing and the critical value approach will always lead to the same rejection decision; that is, whenever the p-value is less than or equal to , the value of the test statistic will be less than or equal to the critical value.
 The advantage of the p-value approach is that the p-value tells us how significant the results are (the observed level of significance).
 If we use the critical value approach, we only know that the results are significant at the stated level of significance.

Upper Tail Test

 At the beginning of this class, we said that one-tailed tests about a population mean take one of the following two forms:

Lower Tail Test

Upper Tail Test

H0:   0

H0:   0

Ha:  < 0

Ha:  > 0

 We used the Hilltop Coffee study to illustrate how to conduct a

lower tail test. We can use the same general approach to conduct

an upper tail test.

Upper Tail Test
 The test statistic z is still computed using equation (5.5). But, for an upper tail test, the p-value is the probability of obtaining a value for the test statistic as large as or larger than that provided by the sample.
 Thus, to compute the p-value for the upper tail test in the  known case, we must find the area under the standard normal curve to the right of the test statistic.
 Using the critical value approach causes us to reject the null hypothesis if the value of the test statistic is greater than or equal to the critical value z; in other words, we reject H0 if z  z.

Two-Tailed Test
 In hypothesis testing, the general form for a two-tailed test about a population mean is as follows: H0:  = 0 Ha:   0
 Here we show how to conduct a two-tailed test about a population mean for the  known case.
 As an illustration, we consider the hypothesis testing situation facing MaxFlight, Inc. The U.S. Golf Association (USGA) establishes rules that manufacturers of golf equipment must meet if their products are to be acceptable for use in USGA events. MaxFlight uses a high-technology manufacturing process to produce golf balls with a mean driving distance of 295 yards.

Two-Tailed Test
Sometimes, however, the process gets out of adjustment and produces golf balls with a mean driving distance different from 295 yards. When the mean distance falls below 295 yards, the company worries about losing sales because the golf balls do not provide as much distance as advertised. When the mean distance passes 295 yards, MaxFlight's golf balls may be rejected by the USGA for exceeding the overall distance standard concerning carry and roll.

Two-Tailed Test
MaxFlight's quality control program involves taking periodic samples of 50 golf balls to monitor the manufacturing process.
For each sample, a hypothesis test is conducted to determine whether the process has fallen out of adjustment.
Let us develop the null and alternative hypotheses. We begin by assuming that the process is functioning correctly; that is, the golf balls being produced have a mean distance of 295 yards. This assumption establishes the null hypothesis.

Two-Tailed Test

The alternative hypothesis is that the mean distance is not equal to 295 yards.

With a hypothesized alternative hypotheses

vfaolruetheofMa0xF=lig2h9t5h, ytphoethneusilsl

and test

are as follows:

H0:  = 295

Ha:   295

If the sample mean is significantly less than 295 yards or

significantly greater this case, corrective

than 295 yards, action will be

twakeewn iltloreajedcjut sHt 0.thIne

manufacturing process.

Two-Tailed Test

On the other hand, if x does not deviate from the

hypothesized mean will not be rejected

an0d=n2o95acbtiyona

wsigillnbifeicatankteanmtoouandt,juHs0t

the manufacturing process.

The quality control team selected  = .05 as the level of significance for the test. Data from previous tests conducted when the process was known to be in adjustment show that the population standard deviation can be assumed known with a value of  = 12.

Two-Tailed Test

Thus, with a sample size of n = 50, the standard error of

x is

x 


n

12  1.697. 50

Because the sample size is large, the central limit theorem

allows us to conclude that the sampling distribution of

x can be approximated by a normal distribution.

Figure 4.4 shows the sampling distribution of x for the

MaxFlight hypothesis test with a hypothesized population

mean of 0 = 295.

xFIGURE 4.4 SAMPLING DISTRIBUTION OF FOR
THE MAXFLIGHT HYPOTHESIS TEST

Two-Tailed Test
Suppose that a sample of 50 golf balls is selected and
that the sample mean is x = 297.6 yards. This sample
mean provides support for the conclusion that the population mean is larger than 295 yards.
Is this value of x enough larger than 295 to cause us
to reject H0 at the .05 level of significance? In the previous class we described two approaches that can be used to answer this question: the p-value approach and the critical value approach.

p-value Approach
Recall that the p-value is a probability used to determine whether the null hypothesis should be rejected. For a two-tailed test, values of the test statistic in either tail provide evidence against the null hypothesis. For a two-tailed test, the p-value is the probability of obtaining a value for the test statistic as unlikely as or more unlikely than that provided by the sample. Let us see how the p-value is computed for the MaxFlight hypothesis test.

p-value Approach
First we compute the value of the test statistic. For the  known case, the test statistic z is a standard normal random variable.
Using equation (4.1) with x = 297.6, the value of the
test statistic is

z



x  0 n



297.6  295 12 50



2.6 1.697

 1.532.

p-value approach
Now to compute the p-value we must find the probability of obtaining a value for the test statistic at least as unlikely as z = 1.532. Clearly values of z  1.532 are at least as unlikely.
But, because this is a two-tailed test, values of z - 1.532 are also at least as unlikely as the value of the test statistic provided by the sample.
In Figure 4.5, we see that the two-tailed p-value in this case is given by P(z - 1.532 ) + P(z  1.532).

FIGURE 4.5 p-VALUE FOR THE MAXFLIGHT HYPOTHESIS TEST

p-value Approach
Because the normal curve is symmetric, we can compute this probability by finding the area under the standard normal curve to the right of z = 1.532 and doubling it.
The table for the standard normal distribution shows that the area to the left of z = 1.532 is .93724.
Thus, the area under the standard normal curve to the right of the test statistic z = 1.532 is 1-.93724 =.06276. Doubling this, we find the p-value for the MaxFlight twotailed hypothesis test is p-value = 2(.06276) = .125522.

p-value Approach

Next we compare the p-value to the level of significance to see whether the null hypothesis should be rejected.

With a level of significance of because the p-value = .1260 >

= .05.

.05,

we

do

not

reject

H0

Because the null hypothesis is not rejected, no action will be taken to adjust the MaxFlight manufacturing process.

The computation of the p-value for a two-tailed test may seem a bit confusing as compared to the computation of the p-value for a one-tailed test. But it can be simplified by following three steps.

p-value Approach
COMPUTATION OF p-VALUE FOR A TWO-TAILED TEST 1. Compute the value of the test statistic z. 2. If the value of the test statistic is in the upper tail (z > 0), find the area under the standard normal curve to the right of z. If the value of the test statistic is in the lower tail (z < 0), find the area under the standard normal curve to the left of z. 3. Double the tail area, or probability, obtained in step 2 to obtain the p-value.

Critical Value Approach
Now let us see how the test statistic z can be compared to a critical value to make the hypothesis testing decision for a two-tailed test. Figure 4.6 shows that the critical values for the test will occur in both the lower and upper tails of the standard normal distribution. With a level of significance of  = .05, the area in each tail beyond the critical values is /2 = .05/2 = .025.

FIGURE 4.6 CRITICAL VALUES FOR THE MAXFLIGHT HYPOTHESIS TEST

Critical Value Approach
Using the standard normal probability table, we find the critical values for the test statistic are -z.025 = -1.96 and
z.025 = 1.96 . Thus, using the critical value approach, the two-tailed
rejection rule is
Reject H0 if z  -1.96 or if z 1.96. Because the value of the test statistic for the MaxFlight
study is z = 1.53, the statistical evidence will not permit us to reject the null hypothesis at the .05 level of significance.

Summary and Practical Advice
We presented examples of a lower tail test and a twotailed test about a population mean.

Based upon these examples, we can now summarize the hypothesis testing procedures about a population mean for the  known case as shown in Table 4.2.

Note that mean.

0

is

the

hypothesized

value

of

the

population

The hypothesis testing steps followed in the two examples presented in this section are common to every hypothesis test.

TABLE 4.2 SUMMARY OF HYPOTHESIS TESTS ABOUTA POPULATION MEAN:  KNOWN CASE

Summary and Practical Advice
STEPS OF HYPOTHESIS TESTING Step 1. Develop the null and alternative hypotheses. Step 2. Specify the level of significance. Step 3. Collect the sample data and compute the value of the test statistic. p-Value Approach Step 4. Use the value of the test statistic to compute the p-value. Step 5. Reject H0 if the p-value  .

Summary and Practical Advice
Critical Value Approach Step 4. Use the level of significance to determine the critical value and the rejection rule. Step 5. Use the value of the test statistic and the rejection rule to determine whether to reject H0.

Summary and Practical Advice
 Practical advice about the sample size for hypothesis tests is similar to the advice we provided about the sample size for interval estimation in the previous classes.
 In most applications, a sample size of n  30 is adequate when using the hypothesis testing procedure described today.
 In cases where the sample size is less than 30, the distribution of the population from which we are sampling becomes an important consideration.
 If the population is normally distributed, the hypothesis testing procedure that we described is exact and can be used for any sample size.
 If the population is not normally distributed but is at least roughly symmetric, sample sizes as small as 15 can be expected to provide acceptable results.

Relationship Between Interval Estimation and Hypothesis Testing

 In our previous classes we showed how to develop a confidence interval estimate of a population mean.

 For the  known case, the (1 - )% confidence interval estimate

of a population mean is given by

x  z 2

.
n

 Today, we showed that a two-tailed hypothesis test about a

population mean takes the following form:

 H0:  = 0 Ha:   0
 where 0 is the hypothesized value for the population mean.

Relationship Between Interval Estimation and Hypothesis Testing

 Suppose that we follow the procedure described in for constructing a 100(1- )% confidence interval for the population mean.

 We know that 100(1 - )% of the confidence intervals generated will contain the population mean and 100% of the confidence intervals generated will not contain the population mean.



tTcrohunuetsa(,iinf=w0e0,)rwewjeeitchwt pHillr0obwbeharbeeniljieetcyvteinr.gthtehceonnufildl ehnycpeoitnhteesrivsawl dhoeens

not it is

Relationship Between Interval Estimation and Hypothesis Testing

 Recall that the level of significance is the probability of rejecting the null hypothesis when it is true.

 So constructing a 100(1 - )% confidence interval and rejecting

Hco0nwduhcetninevgear

the interval does not two-tailed hypothesis

ctoesnttawinith0isaesqtuhievalelevnetl

to of

significance.

 The procedure for using a confidence interval to conduct a twotailed hypothesis test can now be summarized.

Relationship Between Interval Estimation and Hypothesis Testing

A CONFIDENCE INTERVAL APPROACH TO TESTING A HYPOTHESIS OF THE FORM

H0:  = 0

Ha:   0

1. Select a simple random sample from the population and use

the for

value of the sample mean the population mean :

to

develop

the
x

czon2fidenn.ce

interval

2. If the confidence interval contains the do not reject H0. Otherwise, reject H0.

hypothesized

value

0,

Relationship Between Interval Estimation and Hypothesis Testing

 Let us illustrate by conducting the MaxFlight hypothesis test using the confidence interval approach.

 The MaxFlight hypothesis test takes the following form:

H0:  = 295

Ha:   295

 To test these hypotheses with a level of significance of  = .05, we

sampled 50 golf balls and found a sample mean distance of yards. Recall that the population standard deviation is  = 12.

x

 297.6

 Uinstienrgvatlheessteimraetseuoltfsthweitphozp.0u2l5at=io1n.9m6,eawneisfind that the 95% confidence

x  z 2


n

 297.6 1.96

12 50

 297.6  3.326.

Relationship Between Interval Estimation and Hypothesis Testing
 The latter formula gives the interval from 294.28 to 300.93.

 This finding enables the quality control manager to conclude with 95% confidence that the mean distance for the population of golf balls is between 294.3 and 300.9 yards.

 Because the hypothesized value for the population mean,

th0a=t

295, is in this interval, the the null hypothesis, H0:  =

hypothesis testing conclusion 295, cannot be rejected.

is

 Note that this discussion and example pertain to two-tailed hypothesis tests about a

population mean. However, the same confidence interval and two-tailed hypothesis

testing relationship exists for other population parameters.

 The relationship can also be extended to one-tailed tests about population parameters. Doing so, however, requires the development of one-sided confidence intervals, which are rarely used in practice.

Notes and Comments
 We have shown how to use p-values. The smaller the p-value itinnhtefeargvprorereatotiefnrgHtash.meHaeelrvleipda-evranelcuseoeasm.geaignusitdHel0inaensdstthaetismtiociraentshseugegviedsetnfcoer
 Less than .01--Overwhelming evidence to conclude Ha is true.  Between .01 and .05--Strong evidence to conclude Ha is true.  Between .05 and .10--Weak evidence to conclude Ha is true.  Greater than .10--Insufficient evidence to conclude Ha is true.

Exercise 4.5.
Consider the following hypothesis test: H0:   20 Ha:  < 20
 A sample of 50 provided a sample mean of 19.4. The population standard deviation is 2.
a. Compute the value of the test statistic. b. What is the p-value? c. Using  = .05, what is your conclusion? d. What is the rejection rule using the critical value? What is your conclusion?

HOMEWORK 4.3
 4.3.1. Individuals filing federal income tax returns prior to March 31 received
an average refund of $1056. Consider the population of "last-minute" filers who mail their tax return during the last five days of the income tax period (typically April 10 to April 15). a. A researcher suggests that a reason individuals wait until the last five days is that on average these individuals receive lower refunds than do early filers. Develop appropriate hypotheses such that rejection of H0 will support the researcher's contention. b. For a sample of 400 individuals who filed a tax return between April 10 and 15, the sample mean refund was $910. Based on prior experience a population standard deviation of  $1600 may be assumed. What is the p-value? c. At  =.05, what is your conclusion? d. Repeat the preceding hypothesis test using the critical value approach.

HOMEWORK 4.3 (cont-ed)
 4.3.2. In a study entitled How Undergraduate Students Use Credit Cards, it was reported that undergraduate students have a mean credit card balance of $3173 (Sallie Mae, April 2009). This figure was an all-time high and had increased 44% over the previous five years. Assume that a current study is being conducted to determine if it can be concluded that the mean credit card balance for undergraduate students has continued to increase compared to the April 2009 report. Based on previous studies, use a population standard deviation  =$1000.
a. State the null and alternative hypotheses. b. What is the p-value for a sample of 180 undergraduate students with a sample mean credit card balance of $3325? c. Using a .05 level of significance, what is your conclusion?

HOMEWORK 4.3 (cont-ed)
4.3.3. Consider the following hypothesis test: H0:   25 Ha:  > 25
A sample of 40 provided a sample mean of 26.4. The population standard deviation is 6. a. Compute the value of the test statistic. b. What is the p-value? c. At  = .01, what is your conclusion? d. What is the rejection rule using the critical value? What is your conclusion?

Derechos Reservados 2016 Tecnológico de Monterrey Prohibida la reproducción total o parcial de esta obra sin expresa autorización del Tecnológico de Monterrey.

