Eigenvalues and eigenvectors
In linear algebra, an eigenvector or characteristic vector of a linear transformation is a non-zero vector that changes by only a scalar
factor when that linear transformation is applied to it. More formally, if T is a linear transformation from a vector space V over a field F into itself and v is a vector in V that is not the zero vector, then v is an eigenvector of T if T(v) is a scalar multiple of v. This condition can be written
as the equation
where  is a scalar in the field F, known as the eigenvalue, characteristic value, or characteristic root associated with the eigenvector v.
If the vector space V is finite-dimensional, then the linear transformation T can be represented as a square matrix A, and the vector v by a
column vector, rendering the above mapping as a matrix multiplication on the left hand side and a scaling of the column vector on the right hand side in the equation
There is a direct correspondence between n-by-n square matrices and linear transformations from an n-dimensional vector space to itself, given any basis of the vector space. For this reason, it is equivalent to define eigenvalues and eigenvectors using either the language of matrices or the language of linear transformations.[1][2]
Geometrically, an eigenvector, corresponding to a real nonzero eigenvalue, points in a direction that is stretched by the transformation and the eigenvalue is the factor by which it is stretched. If the eigenvalue is negative, the direction is reversed.[3]
Contents
Overview History Eigenvalues and eigenvectors of matrices
Eigenvalues and the characteristic polynomial Algebraic multiplicity Eigenspaces, geometric multiplicity, and the eigenbasis for matrices Additional properties of eigenvalues Left and right eigenvectors Diagonalization and the eigendecomposition Variational characterization Matrix examples
Two-dimensional matrix example Three-dimensional matrix example Three-dimensional matrix example with complex eigenvalues Diagonal matrix example Triangular matrix example Matrix with repeated eigenvalues example Eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of differential operators Derivative operator example General definition Eigenspaces, geometric multiplicity, and the eigenbasis Zero vector as an eigenvector Spectral theory Associative algebras and representation theory Dynamic equations Calculation Classical method Eigenvalues Eigenvectors
Simple iterative methods Modern methods

Modern methods Applications
Eigenvalues of geometric transformations Schrödinger equation Molecular orbitals Geology and glaciology Principal component analysis Vibration analysis Eigenfaces Tensor of moment of inertia Stress tensor Graphs Basic reproduction number See also Footnotes Notes References External links Theory Demonstration applets
Overview
Eigenvalues and eigenvectors feature prominently in the analysis of linear transformations. The prefix eigen- is adopted from the German word eigen for "proper", "characteristic".[4] Originally utilized to study principal axes of the rotational motion of rigid bodies, eigenvalues and eigenvectors have a wide range of applications, for example in stability analysis, vibration analysis, atomic orbitals, facial recognition, and matrix diagonalization.
In essence, an eigenvector v of a linear transformation T is a non-zero vector that, when T is applied to it, does not change direction. Applying T to the eigenvector only scales the eigenvector by the scalar value , called an eigenvalue. This condition can be written as the equation

referred to as the eigenvalue equation or eigenequation. In general,  may be any scalar. For example,  may be negative, in which case the eigenvector reverses direction as part of the scaling, or it may be zero or complex.

The Mona Lisa example pictured at right provides a simple illustration. Each point on the painting can be represented as a vector pointing from the center of the painting to that point. The linear transformation in this example is called a shear mapping. Points in the top half are moved to the right and points in the bottom half are moved to the left proportional to how far they are from the horizontal axis that goes through the middle of the painting. The vectors pointing to each point in the original image are therefore tilted right or left and made longer or shorter by the transformation. Notice that points along the horizontal axis do not move at all when this transformation is applied. Therefore, any vector that points directly to the right or left with no vertical component is an eigenvector of this transformation because the mapping does not change its direction. Moreover, these eigenvectors all have an eigenvalue equal to one because the mapping does not change their length, either.
Linear transformations can take many different forms, mapping vectors in a variety of vector spaces, so the eigenvectors can also take many forms. For example, the linear transformation could be a differential operator like , in which case the eigenvectors are functions called eigenfunctions that are scaled by that differential operator, such as

In this shear mapping the red arrow changes direction but the blue arrow does not. The blue arrow is an eigenvector of this shear mapping because it does not change direction, and since its length is unchanged, its eigenvalue is 1.

Alternatively, the linear transformation could take the form of an n by n matrix, in which case the eigenvectors are n by 1 matrices that are also referred to as eigenvectors. If the linear transformation is expressed in the form of an n by n matrix A, then the eigenvalue equation above for a linear transformation can be rewritten as the matrix multiplication

where the eigenvector v is an n by 1 matrix. For a matrix, eigenvalues and eigenvectors can be used to decompose the matrix, for example by diagonalizing it.
Eigenvalues and eigenvectors give rise to many closely related mathematical concepts, and the prefix eigen- is applied liberally when naming them:
The set of all eigenvectors of a linear transformation, each paired with its corresponding eigenvalue, is called the eigensystem of that transformation.[5][6] The set of all eigenvectors of T corresponding to the same eigenvalue, together with the zero vector, is called an eigenspace or characteristic space of T.[7][8] If the set of eigenvectors of T form a basis of the domain of T, then this basis is called an eigenbasis.
History
Eigenvalues are often introduced in the context of linear algebra or matrix theory. Historically, however, they arose in the study of quadratic forms and differential equations.
In the 18th century Euler studied the rotational motion of a rigid body and discovered the importance of the principal axes.[9] Lagrange realized that the principal axes are the eigenvectors of the inertia matrix.[10] In the early 19th century, Cauchy saw how their work could be used to classify the quadric surfaces, and generalized it to arbitrary dimensions.[11] Cauchy also coined the term racine caractéristique (characteristic root) for what is now called eigenvalue; his term survives in characteristic equation.[12][13]
Fourier used the work of Laplace and Lagrange to solve the heat equation by separation of variables in his famous 1822 book Théorie analytique de la chaleur.[14] Sturm developed Fourier's ideas further and brought them to the attention of Cauchy, who combined them with his own ideas and arrived at the fact that real symmetric matrices have real eigenvalues.[11] This was extended by Hermite in 1855 to what are now called Hermitian matrices.[12] Around the same time, Brioschi proved that the eigenvalues of orthogonal matrices lie on the unit circle,[11] and Clebsch found the corresponding result for skew-symmetric matrices.[12] Finally, Weierstrass clarified an important aspect in the stability theory started by Laplace by realizing that defective matrices can cause instability.[11]
In the meantime, Liouville studied eigenvalue problems similar to those of Sturm; the discipline that grew out of their work is now called Sturm­Liouville theory.[15] Schwarz studied the first eigenvalue of Laplace's equation on general domains towards the end of the 19th century, while Poincaré studied Poisson's equation a few years later.[16]
At the start of the 20th century, Hilbert studied the eigenvalues of integral operators by viewing the operators as infinite matrices.[17] He was the first to use the German word eigen, which means "own", to denote eigenvalues and eigenvectors in 1904,[18] though he may have been following a related usage by Helmholtz. For some time, the standard term in English was "proper value", but the more distinctive term "eigenvalue" is standard today.[19]
The first numerical algorithm for computing eigenvalues and eigenvectors appeared in 1929, when Von Mises published the power method. One of the most popular methods today, the QR algorithm, was proposed independently by John G.F. Francis[20] and Vera Kublanovskaya[21] in 1961.[22]
Eigenvalues and eigenvectors of matrices
Eigenvalues and eigenvectors are often introduced to students in the context of linear algebra courses focused on matrices.[23][24] Furthermore, linear transformations can be represented using matrices,[1][2] which is especially common in numerical and computational applications.[25]
Consider n-dimensional vectors that are formed as a list of n scalars, such as the three-dimensional vectors
These vectors are said to be scalar multiples of each other, or parallel or collinear, if there is a scalar  such that
In this case  = -1/20.
Now consider the linear transformation of n-dimensional vectors defined by an n by n matrix A,

or

where, for each row,

.

If it occurs that v and w are scalar multiples, that is if

Matrix A acts by stretching the vector x, not changing its direction, so x is an eigenvector of A.

(1)
then v is an eigenvector of the linear transformation A and the scale factor  is the eigenvalue corresponding to that eigenvector. Equation (1) is the eigenvalue equation for the matrix A.
Equation (1) can be stated equivalently as
(2)
where I is the n by n identity matrix.
Eigenvalues and the characteristic polynomial
Equation (2) has a non-zero solution v if and only if the determinant of the matrix (A - I) is zero. Therefore, the eigenvalues of A are values of  that satisfy the equation
(3)
Using Leibniz' rule for the determinant, the left hand side of Equation (3) is a polynomial function of the variable  and the degree of this polynomial is n, the order of the matrix A. Its coefficients depend on the entries of A, except that its term of degree n is always (-1)nn. This polynomial is called the characteristic polynomial of A. Equation (3) is called the characteristic equation or the secular equation of A. The fundamental theorem of algebra implies that the characteristic polynomial of an n-by-n matrix A, being a polynomial of degree n, can be factored into the product of n linear terms,
(4)
where each i may be real but in general is a complex number. The numbers 1, 2, ... n, which may not all have distinct values, are roots of the polynomial and are the eigenvalues of A. As a brief example, which is described in more detail in the examples section later, consider the matrix

Taking the determinant of (M - I), the characteristic polynomial of M is

Setting the characteristic polynomial equal to zero, it has roots at  = 1 and  = 3, which are the two eigenvalues of M. The eigenvectors corresponding to each eigenvalue can be found by solving for the components of v in the equation Mv = v. In this example, the eigenvectors are any non-zero scalar multiples of

If the entries of the matrix A are all real numbers, then the coefficients of the characteristic polynomial will also be real numbers, but the eigenvalues may still have non-zero imaginary parts. The entries of the corresponding eigenvectors therefore may also have non-zero imaginary parts. Similarly, the eigenvalues may be irrational numbers even if all the entries of A are rational numbers or even if they are all integers. However, if the entries of A are all algebraic numbers, which include the rationals, the eigenvalues are complex algebraic numbers.
The non-real roots of a real polynomial with real coefficients can be grouped into pairs of complex conjugates, namely with the two members of each pair having imaginary parts that differ only in sign and the same real part. If the degree is odd, then by the intermediate value theorem at least one of the roots is real. Therefore, any real matrix with odd order has at least one real eigenvalue, whereas a real matrix with even order may not have any real eigenvalues. The eigenvectors associated with these complex eigenvalues are also complex and also appear in complex conjugate pairs.
Algebraic multiplicity
Let i be an eigenvalue of an n by n matrix A. The algebraic multiplicity A(i) of the eigenvalue is its multiplicity as a root of the characteristic polynomial, that is, the largest integer k such that ( - i)k divides evenly that polynomial.[8][26][27] Suppose a matrix A has dimension n and d  n distinct eigenvalues. Whereas Equation (4) factors the characteristic polynomial of A into the product of n linear terms with some terms potentially repeating, the characteristic polynomial can instead be written as the product of d terms each corresponding to a distinct eigenvalue and raised to the power of the algebraic multiplicity,
If d = n then the right hand side is the product of n linear terms and this is the same as Equation (4). The size of each eigenvalue's algebraic multiplicity is related to the dimension n as
If A(i) = 1, then i is said to be a simple eigenvalue.[27] If A(i) equals the geometric multiplicity of i, A(i), defined in the next section, then i is said to be a semisimple eigenvalue.
Eigenspaces, geometric multiplicity, and the eigenbasis for matrices
Given a particular eigenvalue  of the n by n matrix A, define the set E to be all vectors v that satisfy Equation (2),
On one hand, this set is precisely the kernel or nullspace of the matrix (A - I). On the other hand, by definition, any non-zero vector that satisfies this condition is an eigenvector of A associated with . So, the set E is the union of the zero vector with the set of all eigenvectors of A associated with , and E equals the nullspace of (A - I). E is called the eigenspace or characteristic space of A associated with .[7][8] In general  is a complex number and the eigenvectors are complex n by 1 matrices. A property of the nullspace is that it is a linear subspace, so E is a linear subspace of n. Because the eigenspace E is a linear subspace, it is closed under addition. That is, if two vectors u and v belong to the set E, written (u,v)  E, then (u + v)  E or equivalently A(u + v) = (u + v). This can be checked using the distributive property of matrix multiplication. Similarly, because E is a linear subspace, it is closed under scalar multiplication. That is, if v  E and  is a complex number, (v)  E or equivalently A(v) = (v). This can be checked by noting that multiplication of complex matrices by complex numbers is commutative. As long as u + v and v are not zero, they are also eigenvectors of A associated with .
The dimension of the eigenspace E associated with , or equivalently the maximum number of linearly independent eigenvectors associated with , is referred to as the eigenvalue's geometric multiplicity A(). Because E is also the nullspace of (A - I), the geometric multiplicity of  is the dimension of the nullspace of (A - I), also called the nullity of (A - I), which relates to the dimension and rank of (A - I) as
Because of the definition of eigenvalues and eigenvectors, an eigenvalue's geometric multiplicity must be at least one, that is, each eigenvalue has at least one associated eigenvector. Furthermore, an eigenvalue's geometric multiplicity cannot exceed its algebraic multiplicity. Additionally, recall that an eigenvalue's algebraic multiplicity cannot exceed n.

To prove the inequality

, consider how the definition of geometric multiplicity implies the existence of orthonormal eigenvectors

, such that

. We can therefore find a (unitary) matrix whose first columns are these eigenvectors, and whose remaining

columns can be any orthonormal set of

vectors orthogonal to these eigenvectors of . Then has full rank and is therefore invertible, and

with a matrix whose top left block is the diagonal matrix . This implies that

. In other words, is similar to ,

which implies that

. But from the definition of we know that

contains a factor

, which means that the algebraic

multiplicity of must satisfy

.

Suppose A has d  n distinct eigenvalues 1, 2, ..., d, where the geometric multiplicity of i is A(i). The total geometric multiplicity of A,

is the dimension of the union of all the eigenspaces of A's eigenvalues, or equivalently the maximum number of linearly independent eigenvectors of A. If A = n, then
The direct sum of the eigenspaces of all of A's eigenvalues is the entire vector space n A basis of n can be formed from n linearly independent eigenvectors of A; such a basis is called an eigenbasis Any vector in n can be written as a linear combination of eigenvectors of A
Additional properties of eigenvalues
Let A be an arbitrary n by n matrix of complex numbers with eigenvalues 1, 2, ..., n. Each eigenvalue appears A(i) times in this list, where A(i) is the eigenvalue's algebraic multiplicity. The following are properties of this matrix and its eigenvalues:
The trace of A, defined as the sum of its diagonal elements, is also the sum of all eigenvalues,
[28][29][30]
The determinant of A is the product of all its eigenvalues,
[28][31][32]
The eigenvalues of the kth power of A, i.e. the eigenvalues of Ak, for any positive integer k, are 1k, 2k, ..., nk. The matrix A is invertible if and only if every eigenvalue is nonzero. If A is invertible, then the eigenvalues of A-1 are 1/1, 1/2, ..., 1/n and each eigenvalue's geometric multiplicity coincides. Moreover, since the characteristic polynomial of the inverse is the reciprocal polynomial of the original, the eigenvalues share the same algebraic multiplicity. If A is equal to its conjugate transpose A*, or equivalently if A is Hermitian, then every eigenvalue is real. The same is true of any symmetric real matrix. If A is not only Hermitian but also positive-definite, positive-semidefinite, negative-definite, or negative-semidefinite, then every eigenvalue is positive, non-negative, negative, or non-positive, respectively. If A is unitary, every eigenvalue has absolute value |i| = 1.
Left and right eigenvectors
Many disciplines traditionally represent vectors as matrices with a single column rather than as matrices with a single row. For that reason, the word "eigenvector" in the context of matrices almost always refers to a right eigenvector, namely a column vector that right multiplies the n by n matrix A in the defining equation, Equation (1),
The eigenvalue and eigenvector problem can also be defined for row vectors that left multiply matrix A. In this formulation, the defining equation is
where  is a scalar and u is a 1 by n matrix. Any row vector u satisfying this equation is called a left eigenvector of A and  is its associated eigenvalue. Taking the transpose of this equation,

Comparing this equation to Equation (1), it follows immediately that a left eigenvector of A is the same as the transpose of a right eigenvector of AT, with the same eigenvalue. Furthermore, since the characteristic polynomial of AT is the same as the characteristic polynomial of A, the eigenvalues of the left eigenvectors of A are the same as the eigenvalues of the right eigenvectors of AT.
Diagonalization and the eigendecomposition
Suppose the eigenvectors of A form a basis, or equivalently A has n linearly independent eigenvectors v1, v2, ..., vn with associated eigenvalues 1, 2, ..., n. The eigenvalues need not be distinct. Define a square matrix Q whose columns are the n linearly independent eigenvectors of A,
Since each column of Q is an eigenvector of A, right multiplying A by Q scales each column of Q by its associated eigenvalue,

With this in mind, define a diagonal matrix  where each diagonal element ii is the eigenvalue associated with the ith column of Q. Then Because the columns of Q are linearly independent, Q is invertible. Right multiplying both sides of the equation by Q-1, or by instead left multiplying both sides by Q-1,

A can therefore be decomposed into a matrix composed of its eigenvectors, a diagonal matrix with its eigenvalues along the diagonal, and the inverse of the matrix of eigenvectors. This is called the eigendecomposition and it is a similarity transformation. Such a matrix A is said to be similar to the diagonal matrix  or diagonalizable. The matrix Q is the change of basis matrix of the similarity transformation. Essentially, the matrices A and  represent the same linear transformation expressed in two different bases. The eigenvectors are used as the basis when representing the linear transformation as .
Conversely, suppose a matrix A is diagonalizable. Let P be a non-singular square matrix such that P-1AP is some diagonal matrix D. Left multiplying both by P, AP = PD. Each column of P must therefore be an eigenvector of A whose eigenvalue is the corresponding diagonal element of D. Since the columns of P must be linearly independent for P to be invertible, there exist n linearly independent eigenvectors of A. It then follows that the eigenvectors of A form a basis if and only if A is diagonalizable.
A matrix that is not diagonalizable is said to be defective. For defective matrices, the notion of eigenvectors generalizes to generalized eigenvectors and the diagonal matrix of eigenvalues generalizes to the Jordan normal form. Over an algebraically closed field, any matrix A has a Jordan normal form and therefore admits a basis of generalized eigenvectors and a decomposition into generalized eigenspaces.

Variational characterization

In the Hermitian case, eigenvalues can be given a variational characterization. The largest eigenvalue of is the maximum value of the

quadratic form

. A value of that realizes that maximum, is an eigenvector.

Matrix examples

Two-dimensional matrix example Consider the matrix

The figure on the right shows the effect of this transformation on point coordinates in the plane. The eigenvectors v of this transformation satisfy Equation (1), and the values of  for which the determinant of the matrix (A - I) equals zero are the eigenvalues.
Taking the determinant to find characteristic polynomial of A,

Setting the characteristic polynomial equal to zero, it has roots at  = 1 and  = 3, which are the two eigenvalues of A. For  = 1, Equation (2) becomes,

Any non-zero vector with v1 = -v2 solves this equation. Therefore,
is an eigenvector of A corresponding to  = 1, as is any scalar multiple of this vector. For  = 3, Equation (2) becomes

Any non-zero vector with v1 = v2 solves this equation. Therefore,

is an eigenvector of A corresponding to  = 3, as is any scalar multiple of this vector.
Thus, the vectors v=1 and v=3 are eigenvectors of A associated with the eigenvalues  = 1 and  = 3, respectively.

Three-dimensional matrix example Consider the matrix
The characteristic polynomial of A is

The roots of the characteristic polynomial are 2, 1, and 11, which are the only three

eigenvalues of A. These eigenvalues correspond to the eigenvectors

and

, or any non-zero multiple thereof.

The transformation matrix A = preserves the direction of vectors parallel to v=1 = [1 -1]T (in purple) and v=3 = [1 1]T (in blue). The vectors in red are not parallel to either eigenvector, so, their directions are changed by the transformation. The blue vectors after the transformation are three times the length of the original (their eigenvalue is 3), while the lengths of the purple vectors are unchanged (reflecting an eigenvalue of 1). See also: An extended version, showing all four quadrants.

Three-dimensional matrix example with complex eigenvalues Consider the cyclic permutation matrix

This matrix shifts the coordinates of the vector up by one position and moves the first coordinate to the bottom. Its characteristic polynomial is 1 - 3, whose roots are

where i = is the imaginary unit. For the real eigenvalue 1 = 1, any vector with three equal non-zero entries is an eigenvector. For example,
For the complex conjugate pair of imaginary eigenvalues, note that

T hen

and

Therefore, the other two eigenvectors of A are complex and are two complex eigenvectors also appear in a complex conjugate pair,

and

with eigenvalues 2 and 3, respectively. Note that the

Diagonal matrix example
Matrices with entries only along the main diagonal are called diagonal matrices. The eigenvalues of a diagonal matrix are the diagonal elements themselves. Consider the matrix

The characteristic polynomial of A is
which has the roots 1 = 1, 2 = 2, and 3 = 3. These roots are the diagonal elements as well as the eigenvalues of A. Each diagonal element corresponds to an eigenvector whose only non-zero component is in the same row as that diagonal element. In the example, the eigenvalues correspond to the eigenvectors,

respectively, as well as scalar multiples of these vectors.
Triangular matrix example A matrix whose elements above the main diagonal are all zero is called a lower triangular matrix, while a matrix whose elements below the main diagonal are all zero is called an upper triangular matrix. As with diagonal matrices, the eigenvalues of triangular matrices are the elements of the main diagonal.
Consider the lower triangular matrix,

The characteristic polynomial of A is
which has the roots 1 = 1, 2 = 2, and 3 = 3. These roots are the diagonal elements as well as the eigenvalues of A. These eigenvalues correspond to the eigenvectors,

respectively, as well as scalar multiples of these vectors.
Matrix with repeated eigenvalues example As in the previous example, the lower triangular matrix

has a characteristic polynomial that is the product of its diagonal elements,
The roots of this polynomial, and hence the eigenvalues, are 2 and 3. The algebraic multiplicity of each eigenvalue is 2; in other words they are both double roots. The sum of the algebraic multiplicities of each distinct eigenvalue is A = 4 = n, the order of the characteristic polynomial and the dimension of A. On the other hand, the geometric multiplicity of the eigenvalue 2 is only 1, because its eigenspace is spanned by just one vector [0 1 -1 1]T and is therefore 1-dimensional. Similarly, the geometric multiplicity of the eigenvalue 3 is 1 because its eigenspace is spanned by just one vector [0 0 0 1]T. The total geometric multiplicity A is 2, which is the smallest it could be for a matrix with two distinct eigenvalues. Geometric multiplicities are defined in a later section.
Eigenvalues and eigenfunctions of differential operators
The definitions of eigenvalue and eigenvectors of a linear transformation T remains valid even if the underlying vector space is an infinitedimensional Hilbert or Banach space. A widely used class of linear transformations acting on infinite-dimensional spaces are the differential operators on function spaces. Let D be a linear differential operator on the space C of infinitely differentiable real functions of a real argument t. The eigenvalue equation for D is the differential equation
The functions that satisfy this equation are eigenvectors of D and are commonly called eigenfunctions.
Derivative operator example
Consider the derivative operator with eigenvalue equation
This differential equation can be solved by multiplying both sides by dt/f(t) and integrating. Its solution, the exponential function
is the eigenfunction of the derivative operator. Note that in this case the eigenfunction is itself a function of its associated eigenvalue. In particular, note that for  = 0 the eigenfunction f(t) is a constant. The main eigenfunction article gives other examples.
General definition
The concept of eigenvalues and eigenvectors extends naturally to arbitrary linear transformations on arbitrary vector spaces. Let V be any vector space over some field K of scalars, and let T be a linear transformation mapping V into V,
We say that a non-zero vector v  V is an eigenvector of T if and only if there exists a scalar   K such that
(5)
This equation is called the eigenvalue equation for T, and the scalar  is the eigenvalue of T corresponding to the eigenvector v. Note that T(v) is the result of applying the transformation T to the vector v, while v is the product of the scalar  with v.[33]
Eigenspaces, geometric multiplicity, and the eigenbasis
Given an eigenvalue , consider the set

which is the union of the zero vector with the set of all eigenvectors associated with . E is called the eigenspace or characteristic space of T associated with .
By definition of a linear transformation,
for (x,y)  V and   K. Therefore, if u and v are eigenvectors of T associated with eigenvalue , namely (u,v)  E, then
So, both u + v and v are either zero or eigenvectors of T associated with , namely (u+v,v)  E, and E is closed under addition and scalar multiplication. The eigenspace E associated with  is therefore a linear subspace of V.[8][34][35] If that subspace has dimension 1, it is sometimes called an eigenline.[36]
The geometric multiplicity T() of an eigenvalue  is the dimension of the eigenspace associated with , i.e., the maximum number of linearly independent eigenvectors associated with that eigenvalue.[8][27] By the definition of eigenvalues and eigenvectors, T()  1 because every eigenvalue has at least one eigenvector.
The eigenspaces of T always form a direct sum. As a consequence, eigenvectors of different eigenvalues are always linearly independent. Therefore, the sum of the dimensions of the eigenspaces cannot exceed the dimension n of the vector space on which T operates, and there cannot be more than n distinct eigenvalues.[37]
Any subspace spanned by eigenvectors of T is an invariant subspace of T, and the restriction of T to such a subspace is diagonalizable. Moreover, if the entire vector space V can be spanned by the eigenvectors of T, or equivalently if the direct sum of the eigenspaces associated with all the eigenvalues of T is the entire vector space V, then a basis of V called an eigenbasis can be formed from linearly independent eigenvectors of T. When T admits an eigenbasis, T is diagonalizable.
Zero vector as an eigenvector
While the definition of an eigenvector used in this article excludes the zero vector, it is possible to define eigenvalues and eigenvectors such that the zero vector is an eigenvector.[38]
Consider again the eigenvalue equation, Equation (5). Define an eigenvalue to be any scalar   K such that there exists a non-zero vector v  V satisfying Equation (5). It is important that this version of the definition of an eigenvalue specify that the vector be non-zero, otherwise by this definition the zero vector would allow any scalar in K to be an eigenvalue. Define an eigenvector v associated with the eigenvalue  to be any vector that, given , satisfies Equation (5). Given the eigenvalue, the zero vector is among the vectors that satisfy Equation (5), so the zero vector is included among the eigenvectors by this alternate definition.
Spectral theory
If  is an eigenvalue of T, then the operator (T - I) is not one-to-one, and therefore its inverse (T - I)-1 does not exist. The converse is true for finite-dimensional vector spaces, but not for infinite-dimensional vector spaces. In general, the operator (T - I) may not have an inverse even if  is not an eigenvalue.
For this reason, in functional analysis eigenvalues can be generalized to the spectrum of a linear operator T as the set of all scalars  for which the operator (T - I) has no bounded inverse. The spectrum of an operator always contains all its eigenvalues but is not limited to them.
Associative algebras and representation theory
One can generalize the algebraic object that is acting on the vector space, replacing a single operator acting on a vector space with an algebra representation ­ an associative algebra acting on a module. The study of such actions is the field of representation theory.
T he representation-theoretical concept of weight is an analog of eigenvalues, while weight vectors and weight spaces are the analogs of eigenvectors and eigenspaces, respectively.
Dynamic equations
The simplest difference equations have the form

The solution of this equation for x in terms of t is found by using its characteristic equation

which can be found by stacking into matrix form a set of equations consisting of the above difference equation and the k ­ 1 equations

giving a k-dimensional system of the first order in the stacked variable vector

in terms of its once-lagged value,

and taking the characteristic equation of this system's matrix. This equation gives k characteristic roots

for use in the solution equation

A similar procedure is used for solving a differential equation of the form

Calculation
The calculation of eigenvalues and eigenvectors is a topic where theory, as presented in elementary linear algebra textbooks, is often very far from practice.

Classical method
The classical method is to first find the eigenvalues, and then calculate the eigenvectors for each eigenvalue. It is in several ways poorly suited for non-exact arithmetics such as floating-point.

Eigenvalues
The eigenvalues of a matrix can be determined by finding the roots of the characteristic polynomial. This is easy for difficulty increases rapidly with the size of the matrix.

matrices, but the

In theory, the coefficients of the characteristic polynomial can be computed exactly, since they are sums of products of matrix elements; and there are algorithms that can find all the roots of a polynomial of arbitrary degree to any required accuracy.[39] However, this approach is not
viable in practice because the coefficients would be contaminated by unavoidable round-off errors, and the roots of a polynomial can be an extremely sensitive function of the coefficients (as exemplified by Wilkinson's polynomial).[39] Even for matrices whose elements are integers
the calculation becomes nontrivial, because the sums are very long; the constant term is the determinant, which for an is a sum of different products.[note 1]

Explicit algebraic formulas for the roots of a polynomial exist only if the degree is 4 or less. According to the Abel­Ruffini theorem there is no general, explicit and exact algebraic formula for the roots of a polynomial with degree 5 or more. (Generality matters because any polynomial with degree is the characteristic polynomial of some companion matrix of order .) Therefore, for matrices of order 5 or more, the eigenvalues and eigenvectors cannot be obtained by an explicit algebraic formula, and must therefore be computed by approximate numerical methods. Even the exact formula for the roots of a degree 3 polynomial is numerically impractical.

Eigenvectors
Once the (exact) value of an eigenvalue is known, the corresponding eigenvectors can be found by finding non-zero solutions of the eigenvalue equation, that becomes a system of linear equations with known coefficients. For example, once it is known that 6 is an eigenvalue of the matrix

we can find its eigenvectors by solving the equation , that is

This matrix equation is equivalent to two linear equations
that is
Both equations reduce to the single linear equation . Therefore, any vector of the form , for any non-zero real number , is an eigenvector of with eigenvalue . The matrix above has another eigenvalue . A similar calculation shows that the corresponding eigenvectors are the non-zero solutions of

, that is, any vector of the form , for any non-zero real number .

Simple iterative methods

The converse approach, of first seeking the eigenvectors and then determining each eigenvalue from its eigenvector, turns out to be far more

tractable for computers. The easiest algorithm here consists of picking an arbitrary starting vector and then repeatedly multiplying it with the

matrix (optionally normalising the vector to keep its elements of reasonable size); surprisingly this makes the vector converge towards an

eigenvector. A variation is to instead multiply the vector by

; this causes it to converge to an eigenvector of the eigenvalue closest to .

If is (a good approximation of) an eigenvector of , then the corresponding eigenvalue can be computed as

where denotes the conjugate transpose of .
Modern methods
Efficient, accurate methods to compute eigenvalues and eigenvectors of arbitrary matrices were not known until the advent of the QR algorithm in 1961. [39] Combining the Householder transformation with the LU decomposition results in an algorithm with better convergence than the QR algorithm. For large Hermitian sparse matrices, the Lanczos algorithm is one example of an efficient iterative method to compute eigenvalues and eigenvectors, among several other possibilities.[39]
Most numeric methods that compute the eigenvalues of a matrix also determine a set of corresponding eigenvectors as a by-product of the computation, although sometimes the implementors choose to discard the eigenvector information as soon as it is not needed anymore.
Applications

Eigenvalues of geometric transformations
The following table presents some example transformations in the plane along with their 2×2 matrices, eigenvalues, and eigenvectors.

scaling

unequal scaling rotation horizontal shear hyperbolic rotation

illustration

matrix

characteristic polynomial
eigenvalues algebraic multipl.
geometric multipl.

,

eigenvectors All non-zero vectors

Note that the characteristic equation for a rotation is a quadratic equation with discriminant

, which is a negative number whenever 

is not an integer multiple of 180°. Therefore, except for these special cases, the two eigenvalues are complex numbers,

; and all

eigenvectors have non-real entries. Indeed, except for those special cases, a rotation changes the direction of every nonzero vector in the plane.

A linear transformation that takes a square to a rectangle of the same area (a squeeze mapping) has reciprocal eigenvalues.

Schrödinger equation
An example of an eigenvalue equation where the transformation is represented in terms of a differential operator is the time-independent Schrödinger equation in quantum mechanics:

where , the Hamiltonian, is a second-order differential operator and , the wavefunction, is one of its eigenfunctions corresponding to the eigenvalue , interpreted as its energy.

However, in the case where one is interested only in the bound state solutions of the Schrödinger equation, one looks for within the space of square integrable functions. Since this space is a Hilbert space with a well-defined scalar product, one can introduce a basis set in which and can be represented as a one-dimensional array (i.e., a vector) and a matrix respectively. This allows one to represent the Schrödinger equation in a matrix form.
The bra­ket notation is often used in this context. A vector, which represents a state of the system, in the Hilbert space of square integrable functions is represented by . In this notation, the Schrödinger equation is:
where is an eigenstate of and represents the eigenvalue. is an observable self adjoint operator, the infinite-dimensional analog of Hermitian matrices. As in the matrix case, in the equation above is understood to be the vector obtained by application of the transformation to .

The wavefunctions associated with the bound

states of an electron in a hydrogen atom can

be seen as the eigenvectors of the hydrogen

atom Hamiltonian as well as of the angular

momentum operator. They are associated with

eigenvalues interpreted as their energies

(increasing downward:

) and angular

momentum (increasing across: s, p, d, ...). The

illustration shows the square of the absolute

value of the wavefunctions. Brighter areas

correspond to higher probability density for a

position measurement. The center of each

figure is the atomic nucleus, a proton.

Molecular orbitals
In quantum mechanics, and in particular in atomic and molecular physics, within the Hartree­Fock theory, the atomic and molecular orbitals can be defined by the eigenvectors of the Fock operator. The corresponding eigenvalues are interpreted as ionization potentials via Koopmans' theorem. In this case, the term eigenvector is used in a somewhat more general meaning, since the Fock operator is explicitly dependent on the orbitals and their eigenvalues. Thus, if one wants to underline this aspect, one speaks of nonlinear eigenvalue problems. Such equations are usually solved by an iteration procedure, called in this case self-consistent field method. In quantum chemistry, one often represents the Hartree­Fock equation in a non-orthogonal basis set. This particular representation is a generalized eigenvalue problem called Roothaan equations.

Geology and glaciology
In geology, especially in the study of glacial till, eigenvectors and eigenvalues are used as a method by which a mass of information of a clast fabric's constituents' orientation and dip can be summarized in a 3-D space by six numbers. In the field, a geologist may collect such data for hundreds or thousands of clasts in a soil sample, which can only be compared graphically such as in a Tri-Plot (Sneed and Folk) diagram,[40][41] or as a Stereonet on a Wulff Net.[42]

The output for the orientation tensor is in the three orthogonal (perpendicular) axes of space. The three eigenvectors are ordered by their

eigenv alues

;[43] then is the primary orientation/dip of clast, is the secondary and is the tertiary, in terms of strength. The clast

orientation is defined as the direction of the eigenvector, on a compass rose of 360°. Dip is measured as the eigenvalue, the modulus of the

tensor: this is valued from 0° (no dip) to 90° (vertical). The relative values of , , and are dictated by the nature of the sediment's fabric. If

, the fabric is said to be isotropic. If

, the fabric is said to be planar. If

, the fabric is said to be linear.[44]

Principal component analysis
T he eigendecomposition of a symmetric positive semidefinite (PSD) matrix yields an orthogonal basis of eigenvectors, each of which has a nonnegative eigenvalue. The orthogonal decomposition of a PSD matrix is used in multivariate analysis, where the sample covariance matrices are PSD. This orthogonal decomposition is called principal components analysis (PCA) in statistics. PCA studies linear relations among variables. PCA is performed on the covariance matrix or the correlation matrix (in which each variable is scaled to have its sample variance equal to one). For the covariance or correlation matrix, the eigenvectors correspond to principal components and the eigenvalues to the variance explained by the principal components. Principal component analysis of the correlation matrix provides an orthonormal eigen-basis for the space of the observed data: In this basis, the largest eigenvalues correspond to the principal components that are associated with most of the covariability

among a number of observed data.
Principal component analysis is used to study large data sets, such as those encountered in bioinformatics, data mining, chemical research, psychology, and in marketing. PCA is popular especially in psychology, in the field of psychometrics. In Q methodology, the eigenvalues of the correlation matrix determine the Q-methodologist's judgment of practical significance (which differs from the statistical significance of hypothesis testing; cf. criteria for determining the number of factors). More generally, principal component analysis can be used as a method of factor analysis in structural equation modeling.
Vibration analysis
Eigenvalue problems occur naturally in the vibration analysis of mechanical structures with many degrees of freedom. The eigenvalues are the natural frequencies (or eigenfrequencies) of vibration, and the eigenvectors are the shapes of these vibrational modes. In particular, undamped vibration is governed by

or

that is, acceleration is proportional to position (i.e., we expect to be sinusoidal in time). In dimensions, becomes a mass matrix and a stiffness matrix. Admissible solutions are then a linear combination of solutions to the generalized eigenvalue problem
where is the eigenvalue and is the (imaginary) angular frequency. Note that the principal vibration modes are different from the principal compliance modes, which are the eigenvectors of alone. Furthermore, damped vibration, governed by
leads to a so-called quadratic eigenvalue problem,

PCA of the multivariate Gaussian distribution centered at with a standard deviation of 3 in roughly the
direction and of 1 in the orthogonal direction. The vectors shown are unit eigenvectors of the (symmetric, positive-semidefinite) covariance matrix scaled by the square root of the corresponding eigenvalue. (Just as in the onedimensional case, the square root is taken because the standard deviation is more readily visualized than the variance.

This can be reduced to a generalized eigenvalue problem by algebraic manipulation at the cost of solving a larger system.
The orthogonality properties of the eigenvectors allows decoupling of the differential equations so that the system can be represented as linear summation of the eigenvectors. The eigenvalue problem of complex structures is often solved using finite element analysis, but neatly generalize the solution to scalar-valued vibration problems.

Eigenfaces

Mode Shape of a Tuning Fork at Eigenfrequency 440.09 Hz

In image processing, processed images of faces can be seen as vectors whose components are the brightnesses of each pixel.[45] The dimension of this vector space is the number of pixels. The

eigenvectors of the covariance matrix associated with a large set of normalized pictures of faces are called eigenfaces; this is an example of

principal component analysis. They are very useful for expressing any face image as a linear combination of some of them. In the facial

recognition branch of biometrics, eigenfaces provide a means of applying data compression to faces for identification purposes. Research related

to eigen vision systems determining hand gestures has also been made.

Similar to this concept, eigenvoices represent the general direction of variability in human pronunciations of a particular utterance, such as a word in a language. Based on a linear combination of such eigenvoices, a new voice pronunciation of the word can be constructed. These concepts have been found useful in automatic speech recognition systems for speaker adaptation.

Tensor of moment of inertia
In mechanics, the eigenvectors of the moment of inertia tensor define the principal axes of a rigid body. The tensor of moment of inertia is a key quantity required to determine the rotation of a rigid body around its center of mass.

Stress tensor
In solid mechanics, the stress tensor is symmetric and so can be decomposed into a diagonal tensor with the eigenvalues on the diagonal and eigenvectors as a basis. Because it is diagonal, in this orientation, the stress tensor has no shear components; the components it does have are the principal components.

Graphs

In spectral graph theory, an eigenvalue of a graph is defined as an eigenvalue of the graph's adjacency

matrix , or (increasingly) of the graph's Laplacian matrix due to its discrete Laplace operator, which is

either (sometimes called the combinatorial Laplacian) or

(sometimes called the

normalized Laplacian), where is a diagonal matrix with equal to the degree of vertex , and in ,

t he th diagonal entry is

. The th principal eigenvector of a graph is defined as either the

eigenvector corresponding to the th largest or th smallest eigenvalue of the Laplacian. The first

principal eigenvector of the graph is also referred to merely as the principal eigenvector.

Eigenfaces as examples of eigenvectors

The principal eigenvector is used to measure the centrality of its vertices. An example is Google's PageRank algorithm. The principal eigenvector of a modified adjacency matrix of the World Wide Web graph gives the page ranks as its components. This vector corresponds to the stationary distribution of the Markov chain represented by the row-normalized adjacency matrix; however, the adjacency matrix must first be modified to ensure a stationary distribution exists. The second smallest eigenvector can be used to partition the graph into clusters, via spectral clustering. Other methods are also available for clustering.

Basic reproduction number
The basic reproduction number ( ) is a fundamental number in the study of how infectious diseases spread. If one infectious person is put into a population of completely susceptible people, then is the average number of people that one typical infectious person will infect. The generation time of an infection is the time, , from one person becoming infected to the next person becoming infected. In a heterogeneous population, the next generation matrix defines how many people in the population will become infected after time has passed. is then the largest eigenvalue of the next generation matrix.[46][47]
See also
Antieigenvalue theory Eigenoperator Eigenplane Eigenvalue algorithm Introduction to eigenstates Jordan normal form List of numerical analysis software Nonlinear eigenproblem Quadratic eigenvalue problem Singular value
Footnotes
Notes
References
Akivis, Max A.; Goldberg, Vladislav V. (1969), Tensor calculus, Russian, Science Publishers, Moscow Aldrich, John (2006), "Eigenvalue, eigenfunction, eigenvector, and related terms" (http://jeff560.tripod.com/e.html), in Jeff Miller (Editor), Earliest Known Uses of Some of the Words of Mathematics (http://jeff560.tripod.com/e.html), retrieved 2006-08-22 Alexandrov, Pavel S. (1968), Lecture notes in analytical geometry, Russian, Science Publishers, Moscow Anton, Howard (1987), Elementary Linear Algebra (5th ed.), New York: Wiley, ISBN 0-471-84819-0 Beauregard, Raymond A.; Fraleigh, John B. (1973), A First Course In Linear Algebra: with Optional Introduction to Groups, Rings, and Fields, Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., ISBN 0-395-14017-X Beezer, Robert A. (2006), A first course in linear algebra (http://linear.ups.edu/), Free online book under GNU licence, University of Puget Sound

Betteridge, Harold T. (1965), The NewCassell's German Dictionary, New York: Funk & Wagnall, LCCN 58-7924 (https://lccn.loc.gov/58-7924 ) Bowen, Ray M.; Wang, Chao-Cheng (1980), Linear and multilinear algebra, Plenum Press, New York, ISBN 0-306-37508-7 Brown, Maureen (October 2004), Illuminating Patterns of Perception: An Overviewof Q Methodology Burden, Richard L.; Faires, J. Douglas (1993), Numerical Analysis (5th ed.), Boston: Prindle, Weber and Schmidt, ISBN 0-534-93219-3 Carter, Tamara A.; Tapia, Richard A.; Papaconstantinou, Anne, Linear Algebra: An Introduction to Linear Algebra for Pre-Calculus Students (http://ceee.rice.edu/Books/LA/index.html), Rice University, Online Edition, retrieved 2008-02-19 Cohen-Tannoudji, Claude (1977), "Chapter II. The mathematical tools of quantum mechanics", Quantum mechanics, John Wiley & Sons, ISBN 0-471-16432-1 Curtis, Charles W. (1999), Linear Algebra: An Introductory Approach (4th ed.), Springer, ISBN 0-387-90992-3 Demmel, James W. (1997), Applied numerical linear algebra, SIAM, ISBN 0-89871-389-7 Fraleigh, John B. (1976), A First Course In Abstract Algebra (2nd ed.), Reading: Addison-Wesley, ISBN 0-201-01984-1 Fraleigh, John B.; Beauregard, Raymond A. (1995), Linear algebra (3rd ed.), Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, ISBN 0-201-83999-7 Friedberg, Stephen H.; Insel, Arnold J.; Spence, Lawrence E. (1989), Linear algebra (2nd ed.), Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632: Prentice Hall, ISBN 0-13-537102-3 Gelfand, I. M. (1971), Lecture notes in linear algebra, Russian, Science Publishers, Moscow Gohberg, Israel; Lancaster, Peter; Rodman, Leiba (2005), Indefinite linear algebra and applications, Basel-Boston-Berlin: Birkhäuser Verlag, ISBN 3-7643-7349-0 Golub, Gene F.; van der Vorst, Henk A. (2000), "Eigenvalue computation in the 20th century", Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics, 123: 35­65, Bibcode:2000JCoAM.123...35G (http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2000JCoAM.123...35G), doi:10.1016/S03770427(00)00413-1 (https://doi.org/10.1016%2FS0377-0427%2800%2900413-1) Golub, Gene H.; Van Loan, Charles F. (1996), Matrix computations (3rd ed.), Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, Maryland, ISBN 9780-8018-5414-9 Greub, Werner H. (1975), Linear Algebra (4th ed.), Springer-Verlag, New York, ISBN 0-387-90110-8 Halmos, Paul R. (1987), Finite-dimensional vector spaces (8th ed.), New York: Springer-Verlag, ISBN 0-387-90093-4 Hawkins, T. (1975), "Cauchy and the spectral theory of matrices", Historia Mathematica, 2: 1­29, doi:10.1016/0315-0860(75)90032-4 (https:// doi.org/10.1016%2F0315-0860%2875%2990032-4) Hefferon, Jim (2001), Linear Algebra (http://joshua.smcvt.edu/linearalgebra/), Online book, St Michael's College, Colchester, Vermont, USA Herstein, I. N. (1964), Topics In Algebra, Waltham: Blaisdell Publishing Company, ISBN 978-1114541016 Horn, Roger A.; Johnson, Charles F. (1985), Matrix analysis, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-30586-1 Kline, Morris (1972), Mathematical thought from ancient to modern times, Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-501496-0 Korn, Granino A.; Korn, Theresa M. (2000), "Mathematical Handbook for Scientists and Engineers: Definitions, Theorems, and Formulas for Reference and Review", NewYork: McGraw-Hill (2nd Revised ed.), Dover Publications, Bibcode:1968mhse.book.....K (http://adsabs.harvard. edu/abs/1968mhse.book.....K), ISBN 0-486-41147-8 Kuttler, Kenneth (2007), An introduction to linear algebra (http://www.math.byu.edu/~klkuttle/Linearalgebra.pdf) (PDF), Online e-book in PDF format, Brigham Young University Lancaster, P. (1973), Matrix theory, Russian, Moscow, Russia: Science Publishers Larson, Ron; Edwards, Bruce H. (2003), Elementary linear algebra (5th ed.), Houghton Mifflin Company, ISBN 0-618-33567-6 Lipschutz, Seymour (1991), Schaum's outline of theory and problems of linear algebra, Schaum's outline series (2nd ed.), New York: McGraw-Hill Companies, ISBN 0-07-038007-4 Meyer, Carl D. (2000), Matrix analysis and applied linear algebra, Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM), Philadelphia, ISBN 978-0-89871-454-8 Nering, Evar D. (1970), Linear Algebra and Matrix Theory (2nd ed.), New York: Wiley, LCCN 76091646 (https://lccn.loc.gov/76091646) (in Russian)Pigolkina, T. S.; Shulman, V. S. (1977). "Eigenvalue". In Vinogradov, I. M. Mathematical Encyclopedia. 5. Moscow: Soviet Encyclopedia. Press, William H.; Teukolsky, Saul A.; Vetterling, William T.; Flannery, Brian P. (2007), Numerical Recipes: The Art of Scientific Computing (3rd ed.), ISBN 9780521880688 Roman, Steven (2008), Advanced linear algebra (3rd ed.), New York: Springer Science + Business Media, LLC, ISBN 978-0-387-72828-5 Sharipov, Ruslan A. (1996), Course of Linear Algebra and Multidimensional Geometry: the textbook, arXiv:math/0405323 (https://arxiv.org/a bs/math/0405323), Bibcode:2004math......5323S (http://adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2004math......5323S), ISBN 5-7477-0099-5 Shilov, Georgi E. (1977), Linear algebra, Translated and edited by Richard A. Silverman, New York: Dover Publications, ISBN 0-486-63518-X Shores, Thomas S. (2007), Applied linear algebra and matrix analysis, Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, ISBN 0-387-33194-8 Strang, Gilbert (1993), Introduction to linear algebra, Wellesley-Cambridge Press, Wellesley, Massachusetts, ISBN 0-9614088-5-5 Strang, Gilbert (2006), Linear algebra and its applications, Thomson, Brooks/Cole, Belmont, California, ISBN 0-03-010567-6
External links
What are Eigen Values? (http://www.physlink.com/education/AskExperts/ae520.cfm) ­ non-technical introduction from PhysLink.com's "Ask the Experts"

Eigen Values and Eigen Vectors Numerical Examples (http://people.revoledu.com/kardi/tutorial/LinearAlgebra/EigenValueEigenVector.html) ­ Tutorial and Interactive Program from Revoledu. Introduction to Eigen Vectors and Eigen Values (https://web.archive.org/web/20100325112901/http://khanexercises.appspot.com/video?v=Ph fbEr2btGQ) ­ lecture from Khan Academy Hill, Roger (2009). " ­ Eigenvalues" (http://www.sixtysymbols.com/videos/eigenvalues.htm). Sixty Symbols. Brady Haran for the University of Nottingham. "A Beginner's Guide to Eigenvectors" (http://deeplearning4j.org/eigenvector). Deeplearning4j. 2015. Eigenvectors and eigenvalues | Essence of linear algebra, chapter 10 (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PFDu9oVAE-g&list=PLZHQObOW TQDPD3MizzM2xVFitgF8hE_ab&index=14) ­ A visual explanation with 3Blue1Brown
Theory
Hazewinkel, Michiel, ed. (2001) [1994], "Eigen value" (https://www.encyclopediaofmath.org/index.php?title=p/e035150), Encyclopedia of Mathematics, Springer Science+Business Media B.V. / Kluwer Academic Publishers, ISBN 978-1-55608-010-4 Hazewinkel, Michiel, ed. (2001) [1994], "Eigen vector" (https://www.encyclopediaofmath.org/index.php?title=p/e035180), Encyclopedia of Mathematics, Springer Science+Business Media B.V. / Kluwer Academic Publishers, ISBN 978-1-55608-010-4 "Eigenvalue (of a matrix)" (http://planetmath.org/?op=getobj&from=objects&id=4397). PlanetMath. Eigenvector (http://mathworld.wolfram.com/Eigenvector.html) ­ Wolfram MathWorld Eigen Vector Examination working applet (http://ocw.mit.edu/ans7870/18/18.06/javademo/Eigen/) Same Eigen Vector Examination as above in a Flash demo with sound (http://web.mit.edu/18.06/www/Demos/eigen-applet-all/eigen_sound_a ll.html) Computation of Eigenvalues (http://www.sosmath.com/matrix/eigen1/eigen1.html) Numerical solution of eigenvalue problems (http://www.cs.utk.edu/~dongarra/etemplates/index.html) Edited by Zhaojun Bai, James Demmel, Jack Dongarra, Axel Ruhe, and Henk van der Vorst Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors on the Ask Dr. Math forums: [1] (http://mathforum.org/library/drmath/view/55483.html), [2] (http://mathforum.org/li brary/drmath/view/51989.html)
Demonstration applets
Java applet about eigenvectors in the real plane (http://scienceapplets.blogspot.com/2012/03/eigenvalues-and-eigenvectors.html) Wolfram Language functionality for Eigenvalues, Eigenvectors and Eigensystems (http://reference.wolfram.com/language/guide/DifferentialEq uations.html)

