ScienceDirect
Available online at www.sciencedirect.com
Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) 2079–2089
1877-0509 © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientifc committee of the International Conference on Computational Science
10.1016/j.procs.2017.05.269
International Conference on Computational Science, ICCS 2017, 12-14 June 2017,
Zurich, Switzerland
© 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Peer-review under responsibility of the scientifc committee of the International Conference on Computational Science
This space is reserved for the Procedia header, do not use it
Optimal pricing model based on reduction dimension: A
case of study for convenience stores
Laura Hervert-Escobar, Oscar A. Esquivel-Flores, and Raul V. Ramirez-Velarde
Instituto Tecnol´ogico y de Estudios Superiores de Monterrey. Monterrey, Nuevo Le´on, M´exico
Abstract
This paper proposes a methodology to define an optimal pricing strategy for convenience
stores based on dimension reduction methods and uncertainty of data. The solution approach
involves a multiple linear regression (MLR) as well as a linear programming optimization model. Two strategies Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and Best Subset Regression (BSR)
methods for the selection of a set of variables among a large number of predictors is presented.
A linear optimization model then is solved using diverse business rules. To show the value of
the proposed methodology optimal prices calculation results are compared with previous results obtained in a pilot performed for selected stores. This strategy provides an alternative
solution that shows how a decision maker can include proper business rules of their particular
environment in order to define a pricing strategy that meets business goals.
Keywords: Dimension reduction, Multiple Linear Regression, Optimization, Optimal Pricing
1 Introduction
A convenience store is a small retail business that stocks a range of everyday items such as
groceries, snack foods, candy, toiletries, soft drinks, tobacco products, magazines and newspapers. Convenience stores typically have longer opening hours, serve more locations, and have
shorter cashier lines. Therefore, it is thought that such kind of store charge significantly higher
prices than conventional grocery stores or supermarkets, as convenience stores order smaller
quantities of inventory at higher per-unit prices from wholesalers. However, it is important to
find a correct level of prices in the correct level in order to keep the customers and increase
their profits. Therefore, a price strategy in this business is relevant because the price should
increase the profits but also keep customers happy.
Research pricing methods fall into two main approaches: pricing the total product (pricing
for a complete concept/product) or pricing other elements such as branding or features.
According to [6], the pricing strategy is by definition the effort aimed at finding a product’s
optimum price, typically including overall marketing objectives, consumer demand, product
attributes, competitors’ pricing, and market and economic trends.
1
This space is reserved for the Procedia header, do not use it
Optimal pricing model based on reduction dimension: A
case of study for convenience stores
Laura Hervert-Escobar, Oscar A. Esquivel-Flores, and Raul V. Ramirez-Velarde
Instituto Tecnol´ogico y de Estudios Superiores de Monterrey. Monterrey, Nuevo Le´on, M´exico
Abstract
This paper proposes a methodology to define an optimal pricing strategy for convenience
stores based on dimension reduction methods and uncertainty of data. The solution approach
involves a multiple linear regression (MLR) as well as a linear programming optimization model. Two strategies Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and Best Subset Regression (BSR)
methods for the selection of a set of variables among a large number of predictors is presented.
A linear optimization model then is solved using diverse business rules. To show the value of
the proposed methodology optimal prices calculation results are compared with previous results obtained in a pilot performed for selected stores. This strategy provides an alternative
solution that shows how a decision maker can include proper business rules of their particular
environment in order to define a pricing strategy that meets business goals.
Keywords: Dimension reduction, Multiple Linear Regression, Optimization, Optimal Pricing
1 Introduction
A convenience store is a small retail business that stocks a range of everyday items such as
groceries, snack foods, candy, toiletries, soft drinks, tobacco products, magazines and newspapers. Convenience stores typically have longer opening hours, serve more locations, and have
shorter cashier lines. Therefore, it is thought that such kind of store charge significantly higher
prices than conventional grocery stores or supermarkets, as convenience stores order smaller
quantities of inventory at higher per-unit prices from wholesalers. However, it is important to
find a correct level of prices in the correct level in order to keep the customers and increase
their profits. Therefore, a price strategy in this business is relevant because the price should
increase the profits but also keep customers happy.
Research pricing methods fall into two main approaches: pricing the total product (pricing
for a complete concept/product) or pricing other elements such as branding or features.
According to [6], the pricing strategy is by definition the effort aimed at finding a product’s
optimum price, typically including overall marketing objectives, consumer demand, product
attributes, competitors’ pricing, and market and economic trends.
1
This space is reserved for the Procedia header, do not use it
Optimal pricing model based on reduction dimension: A
case of study for convenience stores
Laura Hervert-Escobar, Oscar A. Esquivel-Flores, and Raul V. Ramirez-Velarde
Instituto Tecnol´ogico y de Estudios Superiores de Monterrey. Monterrey, Nuevo Le´on, M´exico
Abstract
This paper proposes a methodology to define an optimal pricing strategy for convenience
stores based on dimension reduction methods and uncertainty of data. The solution approach
involves a multiple linear regression (MLR) as well as a linear programming optimization model. Two strategies Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and Best Subset Regression (BSR)
methods for the selection of a set of variables among a large number of predictors is presented.
A linear optimization model then is solved using diverse business rules. To show the value of
the proposed methodology optimal prices calculation results are compared with previous results obtained in a pilot performed for selected stores. This strategy provides an alternative
solution that shows how a decision maker can include proper business rules of their particular
environment in order to define a pricing strategy that meets business goals.
Keywords: Dimension reduction, Multiple Linear Regression, Optimization, Optimal Pricing
1 Introduction
A convenience store is a small retail business that stocks a range of everyday items such as
groceries, snack foods, candy, toiletries, soft drinks, tobacco products, magazines and newspapers. Convenience stores typically have longer opening hours, serve more locations, and have
shorter cashier lines. Therefore, it is thought that such kind of store charge significantly higher
prices than conventional grocery stores or supermarkets, as convenience stores order smaller
quantities of inventory at higher per-unit prices from wholesalers. However, it is important to
find a correct level of prices in the correct level in order to keep the customers and increase
their profits. Therefore, a price strategy in this business is relevant because the price should
increase the profits but also keep customers happy.
Research pricing methods fall into two main approaches: pricing the total product (pricing
for a complete concept/product) or pricing other elements such as branding or features.
According to [6], the pricing strategy is by definition the effort aimed at finding a product’s
optimum price, typically including overall marketing objectives, consumer demand, product
attributes, competitors’ pricing, and market and economic trends.
12080 Optimal pricing model based on reduction dimension Laura Hervert-Escobar et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) Hervert, Esquivel, Ram´irez 2079–2089
Applied research data analysis and forecasts have been treated using linear regression [14, 1]
considering multiple explanatory variables combined with other methods for selecting variables
in order to reduce the dimensionality of the problem, for instance stepwise and genetic algorithms [12].
Multiple linear regressions (MLR) model is one of the modelling techniques to investigate
the relationship between a dependent variable and several independent variables.
MLR is a widely used technique to refine decision making in finance and economics. Ismail,
et al. [7] use MLR as a tool to develop forecasting model for predicting gold prices based on
economic factors. Shabri and Samsudin[2] propose a hybrid model which integrates wavelet regression and multiple linear regression for crude oil price forecasting, it is important to highlight
the use of principal component analysis (PCA) to process data subs-series in MLR to reduce
the dimensions of sub-time
Dimension reduction problem has been treated widely, Chun and Kele¸s [4] propose a sparse
partial least squares formulation which aims to achieve variable selection by producing sparse
linear combinations of the original predictors. Li-Ping et al [16] offer a methodology to sufficient
dimension reduction and propose alternating inverse regression to estimate the central subspace
which circumvents the collinearity and curse of dimensionality simultaneously [15].
The problem definition of this research considers a company that operates several convenience stores. The company desires to improve the current pricing strategy in order to maximize
the business performance. The main goals are to obtain the optimum price of each product and
to increase the gross margin. A first approach presented in [5] considers a three-stage proposal.
First stage consists in reducing variables in order to keep the most appropriate variables. This
reduction is based on Pearson’s correlations and the use of a ratio based on interaction of independent vs explanatory variables. The ratio is helpful to reduce the multicollinearity issues.
Then an econometric model was obtained through MLR methodology using a stepwise algorithm for reducing dimensionality, and finally the optimization model with additional business
rules (internal and external) was performed in order to obtain an optimal price proposal. The
strategy was tested in a real case study, where the results proved the value of the methodology.
This research is an extension of the first approach that improves each step. In this way, the
first stage consists on the selection of significant variables using two methods in parallel (in order
to compare later). The methods are PCA and BSR algorithms, then a MLR is performed. The
multicollinearity issues are resolved using Ridge Regression. Finally, the optimization model
is improved by introducing uncertainty in the expected volume sales. This variable was not
introduced in the first approach.
The organization of the document is as follows, the introduction above served to set the
business frame as well as to present the literature review and define problem. Then, the mathematical formulation of the optimization model is presented in section 2. Section 3 describes the
design and implementation of the methodology. Section 4 compares the results with a previous
methodology. The last section 5 consists of the conclusion and outlines the future work.
2 Mathematical Formulation of the optimization model
The pricing strategy proposed in this research is structured in three stages. However, it is
important to define the notation to be used along the description of each stage. The main goal
in the pricing strategy is to obtain the optimal price maximizing margin. Therefore, consider
a set of products P of size n to be sold in a convenience store. These products are grouped
according to a commercial hierarchy into m categories Ci = {pk|k = 1, ..., n}, ?i = 1, ..., m and
pk ? P. Therefore, the union of all categories is the set of all products m i=1 Ci = P. Some
2Optimal pricing model based on reduction dimension Laura Hervert-Escobar et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) Hervert, Esquivel, Ram´irez 2079–2089 2081
categories will contain a large number of products e.g. a category of candies, and others will
have a small group of products e.g. dairy products. Then, the category Ci has a size qi = |Ci|
and depends on the type of category itself.
In this case of study each product pk is clustered in a category Ci. Also products have
historical weekly data of size w. The data provides information related with the date of sale
such as week (xk 0), year (xk 1), month (xk 2, ..., xk 12). There is also information about weather
(xk 13), volume sales (xk 14), discount sale (xk 15), net cost (xk 16), competitor price (xk 17), and prices
(xk 18, ..., xk 18+(qi-1)). The prices of the historical data includes the price of the product pk as
well as the prices of products belonging to the same category.
To be able to optimize prices, it is helpful to determine how prices influence the volume
of sales and the margin. It is also important to determine how other information affects the
business performance measures just mentioned in order to include them in any model. For
that purpose, a preliminary analysis was performed for all categories at the same time. Results
show that product sales change according to the seasons. In figure 1, we present evolution of
unit sales each week of the year, for years 2013, 2014 and 2015. Maximum, mid and low sales
tendencies are clear.
Figure 1: Seasonality of products sales of someone category
PCA is a statistical procedure that uses an orthogonal transformation to convert a set
of observations of possibly correlated variables into a set of values of linearly uncorrelated
variables called principal components. PCA, by finding the eigenvalues and the eigenvector
of the correlation matrix, determines orthogonal axis of maximum variance. Variables are
projected into those axes calling these factor loadings. Whereas observations, when projected
into the axis are called factor scores. Factor loadings show how variables group together. The
dimension of a dataset can be reduced when factor loadings of different variables are rather
close, indicating multicollinearity (to be described later). Factor scores show how observations
group together. Clusters of observations may eventually be observed suggesting similitudes and
differences between groups. Details of the procedure can be found in [10] and [8].
PCA was carried out in order to determine which variables influence the margin variable
32082 Optimal pricing model based on reduction dimension Laura Hervert-Escobar et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) Hervert, Esquivel, Ram´irez 2079–2089
the most. The results given in table 1 shows that competitors price, cost net and prices are
associated with the first principal component. The year and the week are associated with the
second component. The discount event, is associated with the third component. Finally, volume
sales are mildly related to the category in component 4. Values in bold correspond for each
variable to the factor for which the squared cosine is the largest.
Table 1: Square cosine table.
Variable Comp1 Comp2 Comp3 Comp4 Comp5
category 0.009 0.000 0.280 0.544 0.021
year 0.002 0.711 0.000 0.002 0.146
week 0.000 0.832 0.000 0.000 0.003
competitors price 0.519 0.001 0.000 0.030 0.000
net cost 0.906 0.001 0.023 0.016 0.001
volume sales 0.153 0.002 0.161 0.397 0.003
price 0.847 0.001 0.018 0.010 0.001
weather 0.000 0.179 0.000 0.026 0.773
discount 0.033 0.001 0.689 0.016 0.006
Then, we can conclude from the preliminary analysis that the features given in the historical
data are relevant for the study except weather conditions. However, this last feature may result
significant in the analysis by product during the first stage of the methodology (clustering
analysis).
The general approach is to select the smallest subset that fulfills certain statistical criteria.
In the clustering analysis, the objective is the selection of significant variables by product. The
reason to use a subset of variables instead of a complete set is because the subset model might
actually estimate the regression coefficients and predict future responses with smaller variance
than the full model using all predictors. PCA and a Best Subset Regression (BSR) are proposed
for such selection.
BSR is an exploratory model building regression analysis. It compares all possible models
that can be created based upon an identified set of predictors. The general approach is to select
the smallest subset that fulfills certain statistical criteria. Details of the procedure can be found
in [11].
In order to select variables using PCA, we use the projection of variables to the principal
component vector called F actorLoadings. In this way, the variables associated with the component that explain at least 80% of the variability of data is selected for the regression analysis.
For BSR selection, the method is straightforward. Phase 1 ends with the selection of variables,
leading to Phase 2, the MLR analysis.
The main objective in the MLR is to obtain econometric models for each product pk.
Therefore, the MLR attempts to model the relationship between a set of explanatory variables
Xˆ k = [xk 1, ..., xk 18+qi-1] and a response variable yk by fitting a linear equation to observed data.
Each vector has a size of w, where for every value of independent variables Xˆ k is associated
with a value of the dependent variable yk.
The population regression line for the explanatory variables xk 1, ..., xk 18+q is defined to be
µk y = ß0k + ß1kxk 1 + ß2kxk 2 + ... + ß18+ k qi-1xk 18+qi-1. This line describes how the mean response yk
changes with the explanatory variables. The observed values for yk vary about their means and
are assumed to have the same standard deviation . The fitted values bk
0, bk 1, ..., bk 18+qi-1 estimate
the parameters ß0k, ß1k, ..., ß18+ k qi-1 of the population regression line. With all the explanatory
4Optimal pricing model based on reduction dimension Laura Hervert-Escobar et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) Hervert, Esquivel, Ram´irez 2079–2089 2083
variables, formally, the model for multiple linear regression, given w observations of product pk
within category Ci, is given by (1).
yk = ß0k +
18+qi-1
 s
=1
ßskxk s; ?k ? P, qi = |Ci| (1)
Equation (1) showed the model for the complete set of explanatory variables. However, after
phase 1, not all explanatory variables are used for the regression analysis. Consequently, after
the selection of the explanatory variables, formally, the model for MLR, given w observations,
is given by (2).
yk = ß0k + 
s?{1,...,18+qi-1}
ßskxk s; ?k ? P q = |Ci| (2)
Due to the similarity of the data, multicollinearity issues may be present. In statistics,
multicollinearity is a phenomenon in which two or more predictor variables in a multiple regression model are highly correlated, meaning that one can be linearly predicted from the others
with a substantial degree of accuracy. In this situation the coefficient estimates of the multiple
regression may change erratically in response to small changes in the model or the data. Consequently it may not give valid results about any individual predictor, or about which predictors
are redundant with respect to others.
In order to detect multicollinearity issues in the econometric model, the variance inflated
factor (VIF) [9] is computed for each coefficient in the model. There are many different ways of
addressing the issue of multicollinearity among the predictor variables, depending on its source.
Ridge regression happens to be one of those methods that addresses the issue of multicollinearity
by shrinking (in some cases, shrinking it close to or equal to zero, for large values of the tuning
parameter) the coefficient estimates of the highly correlated variables.
Unlike least squares method, ridge regression [3] produces a set of coefficient estimates for
different values of the tuning parameter. So, it’s advisable to use the results of ridge regression
(the set of coefficient estimates) with a model selection technique (such as, PCA or BSR) to
determine the most appropriate model for the given data.
The metric to determine if a model is having high collinearity issues is a thumb rule of
V IF = 30 [13].
If Ridge regression is not enough to diminish the VIF, then an iterative process to continue
reduce the dimensionality of the model is used. Figure 2 shows the details of the procedure.
The third and final phase is the optimization model. The optimization phase consider the
econometric models obtained during the regression analysis. In order to enrich the proposal
with features of the real operation of the convenience stores, a set of business rules are included.
Business rules includes operational considerations of the business as well as the external factors
of the market. The optimization model is performed per category Ci. The mathematical
formulation of the model is given in the following equations.
The objective function is given in (3), which consist on maximizes the total gross margin yk
per category Ci. The margin is given by the econometric models obtained during the regression
analysis.
Maximize 
k?Ci
yk = ßsk + 
s?{1,..,17}
ßskxs + 
s?{18,..,18+q}
ßsxs; (3)
For the optimization model, the unknown variables are the total gross margin yk and the
prices of the product in the category xs|s ? {18, .., 18 + q}. The known parameters are the
52084 Optimal pricing model based on reduction dimension Laura Hervert-Escobar et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) Hervert, Esquivel, Ram´irez 2079–2089
Figure 2: Iterative procedure for multicollinearity issues
coefficients computed in the regression ßsk|s ? {1, .., 18+q} and the explanatory variables xs|s ?
{1, .., 17} associated with tendency, weather conditions, discounts, cost net, and seasonality.
Uncertainty of the data is introduced for the parameter xk 14 associated with volume sales.
Then, xk 14 ~ U(a, b) as it is assumed that volume sales follows a Uniform distribution, where
a, b are parameters desired as minimum and maximum values of volume sales according to
history and experience in the business.
Additional parameters are considered in order to include business rules as constraints in the
optimization. The primary business rule for a price is to overcome the net cost of the product
for at least 3% (4).
xk = 1.03 * xk 16; ?k ? Ci ? P; (4)
Upper and lower bound are given in (5) and (6). In these equations, the proposed price
should be ±15% of the selected reference. The options are the competitor price xk 17 or the
reference price ref k. The reference price is the last price used in the convenience store. Typically, convenience stores are free to set the price of the products as appropriate to the business,
however, there are products with a price controlled by the government. Also, some suppliers
label the wrap of the product with a special price. In these cases, the reference price and the
competitors price are set to the controlled price.
xk = 0.85 * min xk 17, ref k ; ?k ? Ci ? P; (5)
xk = 1.15 * max xk 17, ref k ; ?k ? Ci ? P; (6)
When a category of products is under analysis, it is common to find products of the same
brand and same content, only differing in flavor. Therefore, those products should have the
same price, unless a marketing strategy suggest differentiate one of the products. Then, we
define a set of features Fi = {pk|k ? 1, ...n; } where Fi ? Ci. This set contains all products
under the same features and marketing strategy. An they are constraint to have the same price
(7).
6Optimal pricing model based on reduction dimension Laura Hervert-Escobar et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) Hervert, Esquivel, Ram´irez 2079–2089 2085
xk = xs; ?k = s k, s ? Fi ? Ci ? P; (7)
Another characteristic to consider for a product is the different sizes available at the store.
Then, (8) considers that the price of the product k should be greater than the price of the
product s if both are the same product under different size, where s is smaller than k. Such
definition is given in the set Si = {pk|k ? 1, ...n; } where Si ? Ci. This constraint also serve to
differentiate equal size products but with different marketing strategy.
xk = xs; ?k = s k, s ? Fi ? Ci ? P; (8)
Finally, non-negativity of the variables is given in (9). It is important to highlight that prices
in a convenience store are usually rounded to cents. For this case study, the prices should be
rounded to 0, 0.1¢, 0.5¢, 0.9¢, due to is the price to be label at the store.
xk = 0 ?k ? Ci ? P; xk ? {a.b |a ? N, b ? {0, 1, 5, 9}} (9)
3 Solution methods
To test the performance of the proposed models, instances from [5] are tested with the proposed methodology. The instances are taken from a real case study. The data for each instance
correspond to a real life case from stores located in three cities. Table 2 shows the nomenclature used to identify instances. Due to data confidentiality, the nomenclature will not show
compromised information of the actual places. Then, cities are identified as CT. Products are
classified in different levels regarding its purpose. In this research, two levels of classification are
used. The first level is named ”Segment” and give information about the market segment of the
product. The next level is the ”Category”, which grouped the products by specific similarities.
Categories were built during phase 1 of the proposed methodology according to the commercial
hierarchy.
Table 2: Instances used for the test of the proposed methodology
Cities Stores Segment Category Products
CT1 132 S 26 527
CT2 121 G 46 407
CT3 135 S,G 71 1090
A weekly historical data of the total stores from 2013 to 2015 was used for the regression
analysis. Given the amount of data, a procedure to select, clean and organized data was implemented using Visual Fox Pro. The selection of explanatory variables as well as the regression
analysis was implemented using a statistical software R. The linear optimization model was
implemented in FICO Xpress 7.0.1, the optimization model runs until optimality.
As shown in the table 2, and according to the objectives of the company, the variety of size
is good enough to prove whether the proposal is efficient for a business plan.
4 Results and discussion
The results of this research are presented in terms of reduction of the dimensionality and
the quality of the econometric model versus the approach from [5]. Then, table 3 shows the
72086 Optimal pricing model based on reduction dimension Laura Hervert-Escobar et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) Hervert, Esquivel, Ram´irez 2079–2089
reduction of dimensionality of the econometric models obtained. Rows show the minimum,
average, maximum percentage of reduction obtained in the econometrics models according to
the applied procedure. As can be noted, the reduction from BSR procedure is the lower among
the others.
Table 3: Percentage of reduction of dimensionality
Metric CITY Hervert, 2016 PCA BSR
Min
CT-1 44% 89% 88%
CT-2 61% 67% 47%
CT-3 53% 60% 44%
Average
CT-1 82% 90% 89%
CT-2 89% 88% 73%
CT-3 91% 84% 77%
Max
CT-1 90% 95% 91%
CT-2 89% 92% 67%
CT-3 99% 95% 91%
Mode
CT-1 87% 89% 89%
CT-2 98% 96% 85%
CT-3 93% 83% 89%
Quality of the econometric models can be measure through the variance inflated factor. The
result is given in Table 4, where the rows show the minimum, average and maximum VIF found
in the econometric models. These result is given according to the applied procedure.
Table 4: Variance Inflated Factor
Metric CITY Hervert, 2016 PCA BSR
Min
CT-1 13.85 1.00 1.47
CT-2 14.87 1.00 1.30
CT-3 12.42 1.00 1.27
Average
CT-1 325.42 3.03 9.07
CT-2 184.23 3.28 8.55
CT-3 356.42 4.03 11.58
Max
CT-1 10268.05 21.96 29.95
CT-2 5430.37 29.33 534.24
CT-3 7383.23 26.03 1565.88
The PCA procedure obtained the best result of VIF. Which indicates that PCA allows to
select the best subset of variables without carrying multicollinearity issues. Both, PCA and
BSR performed better than the approach from [5].
Along with the VIF, the R squared in another metric that allows to measure the quality of
the econometric models. R-squared is a handy, seemingly intuitive measure of how well your
linear model fits a set of observations. The result is given in Table 5, where the rows show the
minimum, average and maximum R squared found in the econometric models. These result is
given according to the applied procedure.
8Optimal pricing model based on reduction dimension Laura Hervert-Escobar et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) Hervert, Esquivel, Ram´irez 2079–2089 2087
Table 5: R-Squared result
Metric CITY Hervert, 2016 PCA BSR
Min
CT-1 0.01 0.08 0.45
CT-2 0.02 0.00 0.51
CT-3 0.01 0.01 0.39
Average
CT-1 0.66 0.79 0.97
CT-2 0.73 0.61 0.96
CT-3 0.67 0.75 0.96
Max
CT-1 0.97 0.99 0.99
CT-2 0.98 1.00 1.00
CT-3 0.97 0.98 0.99
For the R-squared, the BSR procedure obtained the best result. R-squared provides an
estimate of the strength of the relationship between the model and the response variable. Both,
PCA and BSR performed better than the approach from [5].
As for the optimization model, due to confidentiality of data, we are not able to present the
entire result. However, in figure 3 we show an example for a category. The results are given
in terms of price and margin per product in a category. The confidentiality agreement of the
case of study prevent us to show any number related, then, scales were removed from the chart.
However, the purpose of the chart is to show the effect of the analysis compared with current
methods.
Figure 3: Example of the result of optimization for one category. note: Scales were removed from
the chart due to confidentiality issues.
In this figure, bars represent the price proposed by each procedure, and it is compared to a
reference. The reference correspond to the real price used in the store, whereas the others are the
optimal prices that should be used instead. Lines correspond to the margin result per product,
92088 Optimal pricing model based on reduction dimension Laura Hervert-Escobar et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) Hervert, Esquivel, Ram´irez 2079–2089
it is clear that halo and cannibalization effects are string in the BSR models. Additionally, the
variable for volume sales plays and important role for the proposal. During the implementation,
the strategy was to set the values for the Uniform distribution of the volume sales as a desire
parameter of minimum and maximum volume to achieve for the same period.
5 Conclusions
Convenience stores serve the entire purchasing population of its geographical area but focuses
on customers who need to purchase items outside of normal working hours such as swing shift
employees and quick shoppers looking for snacks and related items. In order to capture attention
and sales they use prominent signs at the store locations, billboards, media bites on local news,
and radio advertisements to capture customers. These actions combined with a right price
strategy will lead to the success of the business.
In this research we proposed a pricing strategy composed for three phases. The objective in
the first phase was to understand and use the most appropriate variables for the business. For
this purpose a PCA and BSR procedures are used. In order to solve multicollinearity issues,
an iterative reduction procedure with Ridge regression was implemented. Later, through a
MLR we were able to obtained econometric model that will better focus in the major goal,
the increase of the margin. Then, the optimization model will take additional business rules
(internal and external) in order to obtain a price proposal that allowed to increase the margin
under the most possible real scenario. In this way, uncertainty of the volume sales was added.
The proposed methodology is easy to understand and implement within most fields of business. Also, it produces information that can be used to create forecasting and planning models
and it is relatively inexpensive research process if a firm has high quality data. Also, the use of
business rules give an advantage over typical econometric models that only considers one price
and not crossed information.
Future work in this research includes the possible application of new methodologies in a
pilot test. These pilot will help to featuring better the uncertainty data from some elements of
the process.
Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful to Sintec for financial and technical support during the development
of this research. Sintec is the leading business consulting firm for Supply Chain, Customer and
Operations Strategies with a consultative model in Developing Organizational Skills that enable
their customers to generate unique capabilities based on processes, organization and IT. Also,
we appreciate the financial support of CONACYT-SNI program in order to promote quality
research.
References
[1] M. Abuella and B. Chowdhury. Solar power probabilistic forecasting by using multiple linear
regression analysis. In SoutheastCon 2015, pages 1–5, April 2015.
[2] Shabri Ani and Samsudin Ruhaidah. Crude oil price forecasting based on hybridizing wavelet
multiple linear regression model, particle swarm optimization techniques, and principal component
analysis. The Scientific World Journal, 2014, 2014.
10Optimal pricing model based on reduction dimension Laura Hervert-Escobar et al. / Procedia Computer Science 108C (2017) Hervert, Esquivel, Ram´irez 2079–2089 2089
[3] M. El-Dereny and N. I. Rashwan. Solving multicollinearity problem using ridge regression models.
International Journal of Contemporary Mathematical Sciences, 6(12):585–600, 2012.
[4] Chun H. and Kele¸s S. Sparse partial least squares regression for simultaneous dimension reduction
and variable selection. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 72(1):3–25, 2010.
[5] Lopez-Perez Jess Fabin Hervert-Escobar Laura and Esquivel-Flores Oscar A. Optimal pricing
model: case of study for convenience stores. Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, page 8, 2016.
[6] WebFinance Inc. pricing strategy, 2016.
[7] Z. Ismail, A. Yahya, and A. Shabri. Forecasting gold prices using multiple linear regression method.
American Journal of Applied Sciences, 6:1509–1514, 2009.
[8] Ian T. Jolliffe. Principal Component Analysis (second edition). Springer, 2002.
[9] Dan Liao and Richard Valliant. Variance inflation factors in the analysis of complex survey data.
Survey Methodology, 38(1):53–62, 2012.
[10] Y. Ma, S. Sastry, and R. Vidal. Generalized Principal Component Analysis. Interdisciplinary
Applied Mathematics. Springer New York, 2015.
[11] Alan J. Miller. Selection of subsets of regression variables. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society.
Series A (General), 147(3):389–425, 1984.
[12] Avval Zhila Mohajeri, Pourbashir Eslam, Ganjali Mohammad Reza, and Norouzi Parviz. Application of genetic algorithm - multiple linear regressions to predict the activity of rsk inhibitors.
Journal of the Serbian Chemical Society, 80:187–196, 2015.
[13] Robert M. O’brien. A caution regarding rules of thumb for variance inflation factors. Quality &
Quantity, 41(5):673–690, 2007.
[14] Xiaozhen Yan, Xie Hong, and Wang Tong. A multiple linear regression data predicting method
using correlation analysis for wireless sensor networks. In Cross Strait Quad-Regional Radio Science
and Wireless Technology Conference (CSQRWC), 2011, volume 2, pages 960–963, July 2011.
[15] Li-Ping Zhu, Xiangrong Yin, and Li-Xing Zhu. Dimension reduction via an alternating inverse
regression. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics, 19(4):887–899, 2010.
[16] Li-Ping Zhu, Li-Xing Zhu, and Zheng-Hui Feng. Dimension reduction in regressions through
cumulative slicing estimation. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 105(492):1455–
1466, 2010.
11