Description
Convenience stores serve the entire purchasing population of its geographical area but focuses on
customers who need to purchase items outside of normal working hours such as swing shift
employees and quick shoppers looking for snacks and related items. In order to capture attention
and sales they use prominent signs at the store locations, billboards, media bites on local news, and
radio advertisements to capture customers. These actions combined with a right price strategy will
lead to the success of the business.
The challenge in this project is to design a model using data science techniques. The main objective
is to obtain the best price at which the products should be sold, seeking the best margin of
contribution and seeking to maintain or improve the sales volume.
The challenge in this model involves the hypotheses established for the analysis of the data. For
example: How are similar products sales related to your data? Is there seasonality for some
products? How elastic are the products?

Data description
You will work with a single file that contains the following information
Category- Classification for things regarded as having particular shared characteristics
SKU ­ Products
Year ­ Year in which the sale occurred
Week ­ Week of the year in which the sale occurred
System price ­ Price in the information system of the company at the time of sale
Competitor's price - Price of the principal competitor's at the time of sale
Net cost - Cost of the product without considering the profit margin
Units ­ Sold units during the week
Sales amount - Income obtained from the sales during the week
Real price - Income obtained from the sale divided by the sold units
Min temp - Minimum temperature recorded in the week of sale
Avg temp - Average temperature recorded in the week of sale
Max temp - Maximun temperature recorded in the week of sale
Rain intensity ­ Scale to define the intensity of the rain during the week of sale
Promotion ­ Binary value 1- for a sale with a promotion involved 0 ­ for a regular sale.

1

2

