Analytics Driven Pricing Optimization

There are often cultural and systemic hurdles to optimized pricing. A key
challenge is that new products are often so innovative that it is difficult to
determine an ideal starting price. Any proposed pricing optimization solution
must be smarter, more scalable to the entire enterprise, and simpler to use
than existing processes.
Other challenges may include:

There is a better way

» Processing a large number of quotes per quarter
can be a manual process that demands automation

The ideal pricing optimization ecosystem leverages
one or more of the following components:

» Sales organizations sometimes rely on subjective,
non-evidence-based pricing information like price
ratios and set premiums

» Data aggregation, enhancement, and preparation

» Pricing optimization requires advanced analytics
methods and system integration skills that are
beyond in-house capabilities or bandwidth
» Too much pricing variation occurs across teams
and geographies
» Competitive pricing data may be out of date or
poorly-defined
» Customer feedback on pricing is inconsistently
collected

» Advanced data discovery and predictive or
prescriptive models
» Advanced analytics methods and system
integration
» Consistent and comprehensive research into the
drivers of wins and losses
» Scaling predictive price optimization models across
the enterprise by delivering insights to the end user
in a way that's accurate, meaningful, fast, and easy
to use

Our experience shows that creating pricing optimization solutions with an iPhone-like experience
(awesome and simple to use), requires specialized skills, technologies, and resources, such as those
offered by Fresh Gravity.

Phase 1:

Phase 2:

Step 1:
We start with your data

Step 4:
We build a knowledge-based pricing practice

Data is required for success, so that's the best place
to start. Our team will work with you to understand
your metadata (the information about your data),
such as sources, quality, consistency, frequency of
update, etc. We can enhance your data by appending
D&B: SIC and corporate family tree information for
both customers and ideal prospects.

We will propose a well-defined process to interview
sales people and selected customers to help guide
price banding. A win/lost sale study is a good place
to start.

Minimize risk and accelerate success

Automate pricing optimization

Step 2:
We use advanced analytics to let your data
tell the pricing story
Next, we perform a deep analysis on your sales history including product, price, customer firmographics,
sales person, market basket analytics and much more,
using methods like deviation analytics, correlation,
factors analysis, and testing preliminary predictive
models. This process often generates valuable insights and ideas for both pricing and prospecting.

Step 3:
We present the findings and help you decide
on next steps
With a clear understanding of your data landscape,
we recommend data enhancements and also share
our initial insights with your team to build consensus
on next steps.

Corporate Headquarters, USA
2901 Tasman Dr., Suite 222, Santa Clara, CA 95054
T: +1 (408) 359 5735 F: +1 (408) 608 1700 E: info@freshgravity.com

www.freshgravity.com

Step 5:
We automate pricing with predictive models
Our models can help predict the ideal price based
on customer tier, industry, purchase history, geography, and even job titles. Example models we apply
could include neural network segmentation, multiple
regression, and conjoint analysis--a feature decomposition method that aids in pricing novel products
by using a nominal amount of customer survey data
to calculate how much value customers place on
product attributes.

Step 6:
We scale by systematizing the models across
the enterprise
Our tools allow inside and field sales reps and channel partners to select from a few drop-down choices
on their mobile device to see the ideal pricing inflection point to generate the highest likelihood of a sale
at the best profit margin. Our tools can also automate
quotation pricing across all channels and devices.

Australia
50 Carrington Street,
Level 12, Sydney,
NSW, 2000

India
C-408, Teerth Technospace, Sr.
No. 103, Hissa No. 2 ­ 14, Baner,
Pune ­ 411045

