Drone-based Object Counting by Spatially Regularized Regional Proposal
Network
Meng-Ru Hsieh1, Yen-Liang Lin2, and Winston H. Hsu1
1National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan
2GE Global Research, Niskayuna, NY, USA
mrulafi@gmail.com,yenlianglintw@gmail.com,whsu@ntu.edu.tw
Abstract
Existing counting methods often adopt regression-based
approaches and cannot precisely localize the target objects,
which hinders the further analysis (e.g., high-level understanding and fine-grained classification). In addition, most
of prior work mainly focus on counting objects in static environments with fixed cameras. Motivated by the advent of
unmanned flying vehicles (i.e., drones), we are interested
in detecting and counting objects in such dynamic environments. We propose Layout Proposal Networks (LPNs) and
spatial kernels to simultaneously count and localize target
objects (e.g., cars) in videos recorded by the drone. Different from the conventional region proposal methods, we
leverage the spatial layout information (e.g., cars often park
regularly) and introduce these spatially regularized constraints into our network to improve the localization accuracy. To evaluate our counting method, we present a new
large-scale car parking lot dataset (CARPK) that contains
nearly 90,000 cars captured from different parking lots. To
the best of our knowledge, it is the first and the largest drone
view dataset that supports object counting, and provides the
bounding box annotations.
1. Introduction
With the advent of unmanned flying vehicles, new potential applications emerge for unconstrained images and
videos analysis for aerial view cameras. In this work, we
address the counting problem for evaluating the number of
objects (e.g., cars) in drone-based videos. Prior methods
[10, 2, 1] for monitoring the parking lot often assume that
the locations of the monitored objects of a scene are already
known in advance and the cameras are fixed, and cast car
counting as a classification problem, which makes conventional car counting methods not directly applicable in unconstrained drone videos.
Layout Proposal
Networks
Drone-View
Car Dataset
Counting number : 95 cars
Object Counting
and Localization
Drone videos
Figure 1. We propose a Layout Proposal Network (LPN) to localize and count objects in drone videos. We introduce the spatial
constraints for learning our network to improve the localization
accuracy. Detailed network structure is shown in Figure 4.
Current object counting methods often learn a regression
model that maps the high-dimensional image space into
non-negative counting numbers [30, 18]. However, these
methods can not generate precise object positions, which
limits the further investigation and applications (e.g., recognition).
We observe that there exists certain layout patterns for a
group of object instances, which can be utilized to improve
the object counting accuracy. For example, cars are often
parked in a row and animals are gathered in a certain layout
(e.g., fish torus and duck swirl). In this paper, we introduce a novel Layout Proposal Network (LPN) that counts
and localizes objects in drone videos (Figure 1). Different
from existing object proposal methods, we introduce a new
spatially regularized loss for learning our Layout Proposal
Network. Note that our method learns the general adjacent
relationship between object proposals and is not specific to
a certain scene.
Our spatially regularized loss is a weighting scheme that
1
arXiv:1707.05972v3 [cs.CV] 3 Aug 2017Table 1. Comparison of aerial view car-related datasets. In contrast to the PUCPR dataset, our dataset supports a counting task with
bounding box annotations for all cars in a single scene. Most important of all, compared to other car datasets, our CARPK is the only
dataset in drone-based scenes and also has a large enough number in order to provide sufficient training samples for deep learning models.
Dataset Sensor Multi Scenes Resolution Annotation Format Car Numbers Counting Support
OIRDS [28] satellite X low bounding box 180 X
VEDAI [20] satellite X low bounding box 2,950 X
COWC [18] aerial X low car center point 32,716 X
PUCPR [10] camera × high bounding box 192,216 ×
CARPK [ours] drone X high bounding box 89,777 X
(a) (b) (c)
(d) (e)
Figure 2. (a), (b), (c), (d), and (e) are the example scenes of OIRDS [28], VEDAI [20], COWC [18], PUCPR [10], and CARPK (ours)
dataset respectively (two images for each dataset). Comparing to (a), (b), and (c), the PUCPR dataset and the CARPK dataset have greater
number of cars in a single scene which is more appropriate for evaluating the counting task.
re-weights the importance scores for different object proposals and encourages region proposals to be placed in correct locations. It can also generally be embedded in any object detector system for object counting and detection. By
exploiting spatial layout information, we improve the average recall of state-of-the-art region proposal approaches on
a public PUCPR dataset [10] (from 59.9% to 62.5%).
For evaluating the effectiveness and reliability of our approach, we introduce a new large-scale counting dataset
CARPK (Table 1). Our dataset contains 89,777 cars, and
provides bounding box annotations for each car. Also, we
consider the sub-dataset PUCPR of PKLot [10] which is
the one that the scenes are closed to the aerial view in the
PKLot dataset. Instead of a fixed camera view from a high
story building (Figure 2) in the PUCPR dataset, our new
CARPK dataset provide the first and the largest-scale drone
view parking lot dataset in unconstrained scenes. Besides,
the PUCPR dataset can be only used in conjunction with a
classification task, which classifies the pre-cropped images
(car or not car) with given locations. Moreover, the PUCPR
dataset only annotates partial region-of-interest parking areas, and is therefore unable to support a counting task.
Since our task is to count objects in images, we also annotate all cars in single full-image for the partial PUCPR
dataset. The contents of our CARPK dataset are unscripted
and diverse in various scenes for 4 different parking lots.
To the best of our knowledge, our dataset is the first and
the largest drone-based dataset that can support a counting
task with manually labelled annotations for numerous cars
in full images. The main contributions of this paper are
summarized as follows:
1. To our knowledge, this is the first work that leverages
spatial layout information for object region proposal.
We improve the average recall of the state-of-the-art
region proposal methods (i.e., 59.9% [22] to 62.5%)
on a public PUCPR dataset.
2. We introduce a new large-scale car parking lot dataset
(CARPK) that contains nearly 90,000 cars in dronebased high resolution images recorded from the diverse scenes of parking lots. Most important of all,
compared to other parking lot datasets, our CARPK
2dataset is the first and the largest dataset of parking
lots that can support counting1.
3. We provide in-depth analyses for different decision
choices of our region proposal method, and demonstrate that utilizing layout information can considerably reduce the proposals and improve the counting
results.
2. Related Work
2.1. Object Counting
Most contemporary counting methods can be broadly
divided into two categories. One is counting by regression method, the other is counting by detection instance
[17, 14]. Regression counters are usually a mapping of
the high-dimension image space into non-negative counting numbers. Several methods [3, 6, 7, 8, 15] try to predict counts by using global regressors trained with low-level
features. However, global regression methods ignore some
constraints, such as the fact that people usually walk on the
pavement and the size of instances. There are also a number
of density regression-based methods [23, 16, 5] which can
estimate object counts by the density of a countable object
and then aggregate over that density.
Recently, a wealth of works introduce deep learning into
the crowd counting task. Instead of counting objects for
constrained scenes in the preivous works, Zhang et al. [31]
address the problem of cross-scene crowd counting task,
which is the weakness of the density estimation method
in the past. Sindagi et al. [26] incorporate global and local contextual information for better estimating the crowd
counts. Mundhenk et al. [18] evaluate the number of cars
in a subspace of aerial imagery by extracting representations of image patches to approximate the appearance of
object groups. Zhang et al. [32] leverage FCN and LSTM
to jointly estimate the vehicle density and counts in low resolution videos from city cameras. However, the regressionbased methods can not generate precise object positions,
which seriously limits the further investigation and application (e.g., high-level understanding and fine-grained classification).
2.2. Object Proposals
Recent years have seen deep networks for region proposals developing well. Because detecting objects at several
positions and scales during inference time requires a computationally demanding classifier, the best way to solve this
problem is to look at a tiny subset of possible positions. A
number of recent works prove that deep networks-based region proposal methods have surpassed the previous works
1The images and annotations of our CARPK and PUCPR+ are available
at https://lafi.github.io/LPN/
[29, 4, 33, 9], which are based on the low-level cues, by a
large margin.
DeepMask [19], which is developed for learning segmentation proposals, has, compared to Selective Search
[29], ten times fewer proposals (100 v.s. 1000) at the same
performance. The state-of-the-art object proposal method,
Region Proposal Networks (RPNs) [22], has also shown
that they just need 300 proposals and can surpass the result of 2000 proposals generated by [29]. Other works
like Multibox [27] and Deepbox [33] also have higher proposal recall with fewer number of region proposals than the
previous works which are based on low-level cues. However, none of these region proposal methods have considered the spatial layout or the relation between recurring
objects. Hence, we propose a Layout Proposal Networks
(LPNs) that leverages thus structure information to achieve
higher recall while using a smaller number of proposals.
3. Dataset
Since there is a lack of large standardized public datasets
that contain numerous collections of cars in drone-based
images, it has been difficult to create an automated counting
system for deep learning models. For instance, OIRDS [28]
has merely 180 unique cars. The recent car-related dataset
VEDAI [20] has 2,950 cars, but these are still too few to utilize for the deep learners. A newer dataset COWC [18] has
32,716 cars, but the resolutions of images remain low. It has
only 24 to 48 pixels per car. Besides, rather than labelling
in the format of bounding box, the annotation format is the
center pixel point of a car which can not support further investigation, such as car model retrieval, statistics of brands
of car, and exploring which kind of car most people will
drive in the local area. Moreover, all above datasets are low
resolution images and cannot provide detail informations
for learning a fine-grained deep model. The problems of
existing dataset are : 1) low resolution images which might
harm the performance of the model trained on them and 2)
less car numbers in the dataset which has the potential to
cause overfitting during training a deep model.
Because existing datasets have these aforementioned
problems, we have created a large-scale car parking lot
dataset from drone view images, which are more appropriate to deep learning algorithms. It supports object counting, object localizing, and further investigations by providing the annotations in terms of bounding boxes. The most
similar public dataset to ours, which also has the high resolution of car images, is the sub-dataset PUCPR of PKLot
[10], which provides a view from the 10th floor of a building
and therefore similar to drone view images to a certain degree. However, the PUCPR dataset can be only used in conjunction with a classification task, which classifies the precropped images (car or not car) with given locations. Moreover, this dataset has only annotated a portion of cars (100
3Low probability
High probability
Neighbor cues
Figure 3. The key idea of our spatial layout scores. A predicted
position which has more nearby cars can get higher confidence
scores and has higher probability to be the position where the car
is.
certain parking spaces) from total 331 parking spaces in a
single image, making it unable to support both counting and
localizing tasks. Hence, we complete the annotations for
all cars in a single image from the partial PUCPR dataset,
called PUCPR+ dataset, which now has nearly 17,000 cars
in total. Besides the incomplete annotation problem of the
PUCPR, it has a fatal issue that their camera sensors are
fixed and set in the same place, making the image scene
of dataset completely the same – causing the deep learning
model to encounter a dataset bias problem.
For this reason, we introduce a brand new dataset
CARPK that the contents of our dataset are unscripted and
diverse in various scenes for 4 different parking lots. Our
dataset also contains approximately 90,000 cars in total with
the view of drone. It is different from the view of camera from high story building in the PUCPR dataset. This
is a large-scale dataset for car counting in the scenes of diverse parking lots. The image set is annotated by providing
a bounding box per car. All labeled bounding boxes have
been well recorded with the top-left points and the bottomright points. Cars located on the edge of the image are included as long as the marked region can be recognized and
it is sure that the instance is a car. To the best of our knowledge, our dataset is the first and the largest drone viewbased parking lot dataset that can support counting with
manually labeled annotations for a great amount of cars in
a full-image. The details of dataset are listed in Table 1 and
some examples are shown in Figure 2.
4. Method
Our object counting system employs a region proposal
module which takes regularized layout structure into account. It is a deep fully convolutional network that takes an
image of arbitrary size as the input, and outputs the objectagnostic proposals which likely contain the instance. The
entire system is a single unified framework for object counting (Figure 1). By leveraging the spatial information of the
object of recurring instances, LPNs module is not only concerning the possible positions but also suggesting the object
detection module which direction it should look at in the
image.
4.1. Layout Proposal Network
We observed that there exists certain layout patterns for
a group of object instances, which can be used to predict
objects that might appear adjacently in the same direction
or near the same instances. Hence, we design a novel region
proposal module that can leverage the structure layout and
gather the confidence scores from nearby objects in certain
directions (Figure 3).
We comprehensively describe the designed network
structure of LPNs (Figure 4) as follows. Similar to RPNs
[22], the network generates region proposals by sliding a
small network over the shared convolutional feature map.
It takes as input an 3 × 3 windows on last convolutional
layer for reducing the representation dimensions, and then
feeds features into two sibling 1 × 1 convolutional layers,
where one is for localization and the other is for classifying
whether the box belongs to foreground or background. The
difference is that our loss function introduces the spatially
regularized weights for the predicted boxes at each location. With the weights from spatial information, we minimize the loss of multi-task object function in networks. The
loss function we use on each image is defined as:
L(fuig; fqig; fpig) = 1
Nfg
Xi
K(ci; Ni*; u* i ) · Lfg(ui; u* i )
+ ?
1 N
bg
Xi
Lbg(qi; qi*)
+ ? 1
Nloc X
i
Lloc(u* i ; pi; gi*)
(1)
where Nfg and Nbg are the normalized terms of the number matching default boxes for foreground and background.
Nloc is the same as Nfg in that it only considers the number
of foreground classes. The default box is marked u* i = 1 if
the default box has an Intersection-over-Union (IoU) overlap higher than 0:7 with the ground-truth box, or the default box which has the highest IoU overlap with a groundtruth box; otherwise, it is marked qi* = 0 if the IoU overlap is lower than 0:3. The Lfg(ui; u* i ) = -log[uiu* i ] and
Lbg(qi; qi*) = -log[(1 - qi)(1 - qi*)] are the negative loglikelihood that we want to minimize for true classes. Here,
the i is the index of predicted boxes. In front of the foreground loss, K represents that we apply the spatially regularized weights for re-weighting the objective score of each
predicted box. The weight is obtained by a Gaussian spatial
41000 × 600 × 3 500 × 300 × 128
1000 × 600 × 64
250 × 150 × 256
125 × 75 × 512 125 × 75 × 512
c
125 × 75 × 36
125 × 75 × 18
Lloc
Lfg + Lbg
…
Gaussian kernels
Convolution Sum
Spatially regularized loss
Input image
Neighboring ground truth
bounding boxes
Kernel weights K
Figure 4. The structure of the Layout Proposal Networks. At the loss layer, the structure weights are integrated for re-weighting the
candidates to have better structure proposals. See more details in Section 4.2.
kernel for the center position ci of predicted box. It will give
a rearranged weight according to the m neighbor groundtruth box centers, which are near to the ci. The real neighbor centers for ci are denoted as Ni* = fc* 1; :::; c* mg 2 Sci,
which fall inside the spatial window pixels size S on the input image. We use S = 255 in this paper to obtain a larger
spatial range.
The Lloc is the localization loss, which is a robust loss
function [11]. This term is only active for foreground predicted boxes (u* i = 1), otherwise 0. Similar to [22], we calculate the loss of offsets between the foreground predicted
box pi and the ground truth box gi with their center position (x; y), width (w), and height (h) based on the default
box (d).
Lloc(u* i ; pi; gi*) = X
i2fg
X
v2fx;y;w;hg
u*
i smoothL1(pv i ; giv*)
(2)
, where giv* (similar to pv i ) is defined as below:
gix* = (gix - dx i )=dw i ;
giw* = log(giw=dw i );
g
y*
i = (giy - dy i )=dh i
gih* = log(gih=dh i ) (3)
In our experiment, we set ? and ? to be 1. Besides, in order
to handle the small objects, instead of conv5-3 layer, we select conv4-3 layer features for obtaining better tiling default
box stride on the input image and choose default box sizes
approximately four times smaller (16 × 16; 40 × 40; 100 ×
100) than the default setting (128 × 128; 256 × 256; 512 ×
512).
4.2. Spatial Pattern Score
Most of the objects of an instance exhibit a certain pattern between each other. For instance, cars will align in one
direction on a parking lot and ships will hug the shore regularly. Even in biology, we can also find collective animal
behavior that makes them look into a certain layout (e.g.,
fish torus, duck swirl, and ant mill). Hence, we introduce
a method for re-weighting the region proposals in the training phase in an end-to-end manner. The proposed method
can reduce the number of proposals in the inference phase
for abating the computational cost of the counting and detection processes. It is especially important on embedded
devices, such as the drone, to lower power consumption as
the battery power only can provide the drone with energy to
fly a mere 20 minutes.
For designing the pattern of layout, we apply different
direction 2D Gaussian spatial kernels K (see Eq. 1) on the
space of input images, where the center of the Gaussian kernel is the predicted box position ci. We compute the confidence weights over all positive predicted boxes. By incorporating the prior knowledge of layout from ground-truth,
we can learn the weight for each predicted box. In Eq. 4,
it illustrates that the spatial pattern score for predicted position ci is a summation of weights by the ground truth positions which are inside the Sci. We compute the score over
the input triples (ci; Ni*; u* i ):
K(ci; Ni*; u* i ) = (P1 ?2D Pm j2Ni* G(j; ?) if otherwise, u* i = 1
(4)
5in which
G(j; ?) = a · e
-(
x?
j
2s2
x
+
y?
j
2s2
y
)
; (5)
is the 2D Gaussian spatial kernel that takes different rotated
radius D = f?1; :::?rg, where we use r = 4 ranged from 0
to p. The coordinate tuple (xj; yj) is the center position of
jth ground-truth box in Eq. 5, and the coefficient a is the
amplitude of the Gaussian function. All experiments use
a = 1.
We only give the weights for the foreground predicted
box ci where it is marked u* i = 1. By the means of aggregating weights from ground-truth boxes Ni* in different direction kernels (Eq. 4), we can compute a summation of scores for taking various layout structures into account. It will give a higher probability to the object position,
which has larger weight. Namely, the more similar objects
of instances surrounding it, the more possible the predicted
boxes are the same category of instances. Therefore, the
predicted box collects the confidence from the same objects
which are nearby (Figure 3). By leveraging spatially regularized weights, we can learn a model for generating the
region proposals where the objects of instance will appear
with their own layout.
5. Experiment
In this section, we evaluate our approach on two different
datasets. The PUCPR+ dataset, made from the sub-dataset
of the public PKLot dataset [10], and the CARPK dataset
are both used to estimate the validation of our proposed
LPNs. Then, we evaluate our object counting model, which
leverages the structure information on the PUCPR+ dataset
and our CARPK dataset.
5.1. Experiment Setup
We implement our model on Caffe [13]. For fairness
in analyzing the effectiveness between different baseline
methods, we implemented all of them based on the VGG-16
networks [25] which contains 13 convolutional layers and 3
fully-connected layers. All the layer parameters of baselines and our proposed model are using the weights pretrained on ImageNet 2012 [24], followed by fine-tuning the
models on our CARPK dataset or the PUCPR+ dataset depending on the experiments. We run our experiments on
the environment of Linux workstation with Intel Xeon E5-
2650 v3 2.3 GHz CPU, 128 GB memory, and one NVIDIA
Tesla K80 GPU. Our multi-task joint training scheme takes
approximately one day to converge.
5.2. Evaluation of Region Proposal Methods
For evaluating the performance of our method LPNs, we
use five-fold cross-validation on the PUCPR+ dataset to ensure that the same image would not appear across both training set and testing set. In order to better evaluate the recall
while estimating localization accuracy, rather than reporting
recall at particular IoU thresholds, we report the Average
Recall (AR). It is an average of recall with IoU threshold t
between 0.5 to 1, where AR = 1t Pt i Recall(IoUt). As the
metric of recall at IoU of 0.5 is not predictive of detection
accuracy, proposals with high recall but at low overlap are
not effective for detection [12]. Therefore, adopting the IoU
range of the AR metric can simultaneously measure both
proposal recall and localization accuracy to better predict
the result of counting and localizing performance.
Table 2. Result on the PUCPR+ [10] dataset for average recall at
100, 300, 500, 700, and 1000 proposals with the different components of approaches. The method in the middle column represents
the RPN training with the small default box size on conv4-3 layer.
#Proposals RPN [22] RPN+small LPN (ours)
100 3.2% 20.5% 23.1%
300 9.1% 43.2% 49.3%
500 13.9% 53.4% 57.9%
700 17.4% 57.3% 60.7%
1000 21.2% 59.9% 62.5%
We compare our proposal method LPNs against the
state-of-the-art object proposal generator RPNs [22] on the
PUCPR+ dataset with different number of the object proposals. Our results are shown in Table 2. It reveals that
our proposal method LPNs, which leverages the regularized layout information, can achieve higher recall and surpass RPNs in the same number of proposals. The state-ofthe-art object proposal RPNs suffer from poor performance
in average recall. We refer that the factors, which affect
the performance, are upon on the inappropriate anchor size
and the resolution of convolutional layer features. Hence,
in the same manner, we apply the smaller anchor box size
on RPNs on the conv4-3 layer, which is in the same setting as our approach. Table 2 shows that the RPNs utilize
the small anchor size and the higher resolution feature map
bring about a better improvement. It implies that the CNN
model is not as powerful in scale variance as we thought
when using inappropriate layers or unsuitable default box
size for prediction. This experiment also shows that the
performance of our proposed model LPNs with spatial regularized constraints still outperforms the revised RPNs (e.g.,
14.1% better in 300 proposals and 8.42% better in 500 proposals). Besides, we also found that our method with spatial
regularizer significantly performs better in the dense case 2.
The result indicates that the prior layout knowledge could
2We additionally divide the PUCPR+ dataset into dense and less dense
cases. Our method has 16.30% large relative improvement compared to
RPN-small in dense case, which is better than 8.27% for less dense case.
Moreover, our method localizes the bounding box more precisely, i.e., our
method achieves 64.4% recall in IoU at 0.7 which is almost 10% better
than RPN-small 54.7% for 300 proposals.
6potentially benefit the outcome by giving the correct confidence score to the position of instances in images.
Table 3. Results on the CARPK dataset with different components.
#Proposals RPN [22] RPN+small LPN (ours)
100 11.4% 31.1% 34.7%
300 27.9% 46.5% 51.2%
500 34.3% 50.0% 54.5%
700 37.4% 51.8% 56.1%
1000 39.2% 53.4% 57.5%
For looking into the details of the effectiveness of our approach in region proposal, we also conduct the experiment
on our CARPK dataset. In order to ensure that the same
or the similar image scenes would not appear across both
training and testing set, which would affect the observation
of validation, we take 3 different scenes of the parking lot as
training set and the remaining one scene of the parking lot
as testing set. Table 3 reports the average recall of our methods, the state-of-the-art region proposal method RPNs, and
the revised RPNs on CARPK dataset. In the experiment
results, it comes as no surprise that by incorporating the
additional layout prior information, our LPNs model boots
both recall and localization accuracy of proposal method.
Again, this result shows that the proposals generated by our
approach are more effective and reliable.
5.3. Evaluation of Car Counting Accuracy
Since the goal of our proposed approach is to count
the number of cars from drone view scenes, we compare
our car counting system with three state-of-the-art methods
which can also achieve the car counting task. A one-look
regression-based counting method [18] which is the up-todate method for estimating the number of cars in density
object counting measure and two prominent object detection systems, Faster R-CNN [22] and YOLO [21], which
have remarkable success in object detection task in recent
years.
For fair comparison, all the methods are built based on a
VGG-16 network [25]. The only difference is that [18] uses
a softmax with 64 outputs as they assumed that the maximum number of cars in a scene is sufficiently small. However, the maximum number of cars in the CARPK dataset is
far more than 64. The maximum number of cars is 331 in
a single scene of the PUCPR+ dataset and 188 in a single
scene of the CARPK dataset. Hence, we follow the setting
from [18] and train the network with a different output number to make this regression-based method compatible with
the two datasets. We set the softmax to 400 outputs for the
PUCPR+ dataset and 200 outputs for the CARPK dataset
for evaluation. Last, the setting of two datasets, PUCPR+
and CARPK, are the same as the experiment of region proposal phase.
We employ two metrics, Mean Absolute Error (MAE)
and Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE), for evaluating the
performance of counting methods. These two metrics have
the similar physical meaning that estimates the error between the ground-truth car numbers yi and the predicted
car numbers fi. MAE is the average absolute difference
between ground-truth quantity yi and predicted quantity
fi over all testing scenes where MAE = n1 Pn i jfi -
yij. Similar, RMSE is the square root of the average of
squared differences between ground-truth quantity and predicted quantity over all testing scenes where RMSE =
qn1 Pn i (fi - yi)2. The difference of the two metrics is
that the RMSE should be more useful when large errors are
particularly undesirable. Since the errors are squared before
they are averaged, the RMSE gives a relatively high weight
to large errors. In the counting task, these metrics have good
physical meaning for representing the average counting error of cars in the scene.
Table 4. Comparison with the object detection methods and the
global regression method for car counting on the PUCPR+ dataset.
Np
is the number of candidate boxes used in the object detector,
which parameterizes the region proposal method. The ”*” in front
of the baseline methods represents that the method has been finetuned on PUCPR+ dataset. The ”y” represents that the method is
revised to fit our dataset.
Method N
p MAE RMSE
YOLO [21] - 156.72 200.54
Faster R-CNN [22] 400 156.76 200.59
*YOLO - 156.00 200.42
*Faster R-CNN 400 111.40 149.35
*Faster R-CNN (RPN-small) 400 39.88 47.67
yOne-Look Regression [18] - 21.88 36.73
Our Car Counting CNN Model 400 22.76 34.46
We compare three methods on the PUCPR+ dataset,
where the maximum number of cars is 311 in a single scene.
Since the softmax output number of [18] is designed to be
400 for the PUCPR+ dataset, we also impartially compare
to this dense object counting method with the number of region proposals limited to 400, which is a strict condition to
our object counter. For YOLO, we select the parameter of
confidence threshold at 0.15, which gives the best performance in our dataset.
The experimental results are shown in Table 4. The asterisk ”*” in front of the YOLO and Faster R-CNN methods represents that the models have been fine-tuned on
the PUCPR+ dataset, otherwise they are fine-tuned on the
benchmark datasets (PASCAL VOC dataset and MS COCO
dataset respectively), where they also have the car categories. Our proposed method outperforms the best RMSE
on large-scale car counting, even with a very tough setting
in the number of proposals. Note that we have comparable
7Counting number: 292 cars
Ground Truth: 299 cars
Counting number: 114 cars
Ground Truth: 121 cars
Figure 5. Selected examples of car counting and localizing results on the PUCPR+ dataset (left) and the CARPK dataset (right). The
counting model uses our proposed LPN trained on a VGG-16 model and combined with an object detector (Fast R-CNN), where the
parameters setting of confidence score is 0.5 and non maximum suppression (NMS) is 0.3 for 2000 proposals.
MAE performance to the state-of-the-art car counting regression method [18], but the better RMSE implies that our
method has better capability in some extreme cases. The
methods that are fine-tuned on PASCAL and MS COCO
get worse results. It reveals that the inferior outcomes are
caused by the different perspective view of the object even
when training with car category samples. The experiment
results show that by incorporating the spatially regularized
information, our Car Counting CNN model boosts the performance of counting. A counting and localization example
result is shown in Figure 5 (left).
We further compare the counting methods on our challenging large-scale CARPK dataset where the maximum
number of cars is 188 in a single scene. However, different from the PUCPR+ dataset which only has one parking
lot, our CARPK dataset provides various scenes of diverse
parking lots for cross-scene evaluation. In the setting of [18]
method, we also deign a 200 softmax output network for
the CARPK dataset. In order to fairly compare the counting
methods, we again restrict the number of proposals of object counter which has utilized the region proposal method
with a tough number 200 3. The quantitative results of car
counting on our dataset are reported in Table 5. The experiment results show that our car counting approach is reliably effective and has the best MAE and RMSE even in
the cross-scene estimation. An counting and localizing example result is shown in Figure 5 (right). Still our method
can generate the feasible proposals and obtain the reasonable counting result close to the real number of cars in the
3Our method gets better performance when using bigger number of
proposals (e.g., 8.04 and 12.06 for 1000 proposals in MAE and RMSE respectively) in the PUCPR+ dataset. In the CARPK dataset, our method
also has 13.72 and 21.77 for 1000 proposals in MAE and RMSE respectively.
scenes of the parking lots.
Table 5. Comparison results on the CARPK dataset. The notation
definition is similar to Table 4.
Method N
p MAE RMSE
YOLO [21] - 102.89 110.02
Faster R-CNN [22] 200 103.48 110.64
*YOLO - 48.89 57.55
*Faster R-CNN 200 47.45 57.39
*Faster R-CNN (RPN-small) 200 24.32 37.62
yOne-Look Regression [18] - 59.46 66.84
Our Car Counting CNN Model 200 23.80 36.79
6. Conclusions
We have created the to-date largest drone view dataset,
called CARPK. It is a challenging dataset for various scenes
of parking lots in a large-scale car counting task. Also,
in the paper, we introduced a new way for generating the
feasible region proposals, which leverage the spatial layout information for an object counting task with regularized
structures. The learned deep model can specifically count
objects better with the prior knowledge of object layout patterns. Our future work will involve global information, such
as context, road scene, and other objects which can help distinguish between false car-like instances and real cars.
7. Acknowledgement
This work was supported in part by the Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan, under Grant MOST 104-
2622-8-002-002 and MOST 105-2218-E-002-032, and in
part by MediaTek Inc, and grants from NVIDIA and the
NVIDIA DGX-1 AI Supercomputer.
8References
[1] M. Ahrnbom, K. Astrom, and M. Nilsson. Fast classification
of empty and occupied parking spaces using integral channel
features. In CVPR, 2016. 1
[2] G. Amato, F. Carrara, F. Falchi, C. Gennaro, and C. Vairo.
Car parking occupancy detection using smart camera networks and deep learning. In ISCC, 2016. 1
[3] S. An, W. Liu, and S. Venkatesh. Face recognition using
kernel ridge regression. In CVPR, 2007. 3
[4] P. Arbelaez, J. Pont-Tuset, J. T. Barron, F. Marques, and ´
J. Malik. Multiscale combinatorial grouping. In CVPR,
2014. 3
[5] C. Arteta, V. Lempitsky, J. A. Noble, and A. Zisserman. Interactive object counting. In ECCV, 2014. 3
[6] A. B. Chan, Z.-S. J. Liang, and N. Vasconcelos. Privacy preserving crowd monitoring: Counting people without people
models or tracking. In CVPR, 2008. 3
[7] K. Chen, S. Gong, T. Xiang, and C. Change Loy. Cumulative attribute space for age and crowd density estimation. In
CVPR, 2013. 3
[8] K. Chen, C. C. Loy, S. Gong, and T. Xiang. Feature mining
for localised crowd counting. In BMVC, 2012. 3
[9] M.-M. Cheng, Z. Zhang, W.-Y. Lin, and P. Torr. Bing: Binarized normed gradients for objectness estimation at 300fps.
In CVPR, 2014. 3
[10] P. R. de Almeida, L. S. Oliveira, A. S. Britto, E. J. Silva,
and A. L. Koerich. Pklot–a robust dataset for parking lot
classification. Expert Syst Appl, 2015. 1, 2, 3, 6
[11] R. Girshick. Fast r-cnn. In ICCV, 2015. 5
[12] J. Hosang, R. Benenson, P. Dollar, and B. Schiele. What ´
makes for effective detection proposals? TPAMI, 2016. 6
[13] Y. Jia, E. Shelhamer, J. Donahue, S. Karayev, J. Long, R. Girshick, S. Guadarrama, and T. Darrell. Caffe: Convolutional architecture for fast feature embedding. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1408.5093, 2014. 6
[14] D. Kamenetsky and J. Sherrah. Aerial car detection and urban understanding. In DICTA, 2015. 3
[15] D. Kong, D. Gray, and H. Tao. A viewpoint invariant approach for crowd counting. In ICPR, 2006. 3
[16] V. Lempitsky and A. Zisserman. Learning to count objects
in images. In NIPS, 2010. 3
[17] T. Moranduzzo and F. Melgani. Automatic car counting
method for unmanned aerial vehicle images. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 2014. 3
[18] T. N. Mundhenk, G. Konjevod, W. A. Sakla, and K. Boakye.
A large contextual dataset for classification, detection and
counting of cars with deep learning. In ECCV, 2016. 1, 2, 3,
7, 8
[19] P. O. Pinheiro, R. Collobert, and P. Dollar. Learning to segment object candidates. In NIPS, 2015. 3
[20] S. Razakarivony and F. Jurie. Vehicle detection in aerial imagery: a small target detection benchmark. JVCIR, 2016. 2,
3
[21] J. Redmon, S. Divvala, R. Girshick, and A. Farhadi. You
only look once: Unified, real-time object detection. In
CVPR, 2016. 7, 8
[22] S. Ren, K. He, R. Girshick, and J. Sun. Faster r-cnn: Towards
real-time object detection with region proposal networks. In
NIPS, 2015. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
[23] M. Rodriguez, I. Laptev, J. Sivic, and J.-Y. Audibert.
Density-aware person detection and tracking in crowds. In
ICCV, 2011. 3
[24] O. Russakovsky, J. Deng, H. Su, J. Krause, S. Satheesh,
S. Ma, Z. Huang, A. Karpathy, A. Khosla, M. Bernstein,
et al. Imagenet large scale visual recognition challenge.
IJCV, 2015. 6
[25] K. Simonyan and A. Zisserman. Very deep convolutional
networks for large-scale image recognition. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1409.1556, 2014. 6, 7
[26] V. A. Sindagi and V. M. Patel. Generating high-quality crowd
density maps using contextual pyramid cnns. In ICCV, 2017.
3
[27] C. Szegedy, S. Reed, D. Erhan, and D. Anguelov.
Scalable, high-quality object detection. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.1441, 2014. 3
[28] F. Tanner, B. Colder, C. Pullen, D. Heagy, M. Eppolito,
V. Carlan, C. Oertel, and P. Sallee. Overhead imagery research data setan annotated data library & tools to aid in the
development of computer vision algorithms. In AIPR, 2009.
2, 3
[29] J. R. Uijlings, K. E. van de Sande, T. Gevers, and A. W.
Smeulders. Selective search for object recognition. IJCV,
2013. 3
[30] M. Wang and X. Wang. Automatic adaptation of a generic
pedestrian detector to a specific traffic scene. In CVPR, 2011.
1
[31] C. Zhang, H. Li, X. Wang, and X. Yang. Cross-scene crowd
counting via deep convolutional neural networks. In CVPR,
2015. 3
[32] S. Zhang, G. Wu, J. P. Costeira, and J. M. Moura. Fcn-rlstm:
Deep spatio-temporal neural networks for vehicle counting
in city cameras. In ICCV, 2017. 3
[33] C. L. Zitnick and P. Dollar. Edge boxes: Locating object ´
proposals from edges. In ECCV, 2014. 3
9