Quantum cryptography
Quantum cryptography is the science of exploiting quantum mechanical properties to perform cryptographic tasks. The best known
example of quantum cryptography is quantum key distribution which offers an information-theoretically secure solution to the key
exchange problem. Except for post-quantum cryptography, as of 2017, currently used popular public-key encryption and signature
schemes (e.g., elliptic-curve cryptography (ECC) and RSA) can be broken by quantum adversaries. [1] The advantage of quantum
cryptography lies in the fact that it allows the completion of various cryptographic tasks that are proven or conjectured to be
impossible using only classical (i.e. non-quantum) communication (see below for examples). For example, it is impossible to copy
data encoded in a quantum state and the very act of reading data encoded in a quantum state changes the state. This could be used to
detect eavesdropping in quantum key distribution.
History
Quantum key distribution
Quantum Coin Flipping
Quantum commitment
Bounded- and noisy-quantum-storage model
Position-based quantum cryptography
Device-independent quantum cryptography
Post-quantum cryptography
References
Quantum cryptography uses Heisenberg's uncertainty principle
[2] formulated in 1927, and the no-cloning theorem [3] first articulated
by Wootters and Zurek and Dieks in 1982. Werner Heisenberg discovered one of the fundamental principles of quantum mechanics:
"At the instant at which the position of the electron is known, its momentum therefore can be known only up to magnitudes which
correspond to that discontinuous change; thus, the more precisely the position is determined, the less precisely the momentum is
known, and conversely” [4] . This simply means that observation of quanta changes its behavior. By measuring the velocity of quanta
we would affect it, and thereby change its position; if we want to find a quant's position, we are forced to change its velocity.
Therefore, we cannot measure a quantum system's characteristics without changing it [5] and we cannot record all characteristics of a
quantum system before those characteristics are measured. The no-cloning theorem demonstrates that it is impossible to create a copy
of an arbitrary unknown quantum state. This makes unobserved eavesdropping impossible because it will be quickly detected, thus
greatly improving assurance that the communicated data remains private.
Quantum cryptography was proposed first by Stephen Wiesner, then at Columbia University in New York, who, in the early 1970s,
introduced the concept of quantum conjugate coding. His seminal paper titled "Conjugate Coding" was rejected by IEEE Information
Theory Society, but was eventually published in 1983 in SIGACT News (15:1 pp. 78–88, 1983). In this paper he showed how to store
or transmit two messages by encoding them in two "conjugate observables", such as linear and circular polarization of light, so that
either, but not both, of which may be received and decoded. He illustrated his idea with a design of unforgeable bank notes. In 1984,
building upon this work, Charles H. Bennett, of the IBM's Thomas J. Watson Research Center, and Gilles Brassard, of the Université
de Montréal, proposed a method for secure communication based on Wiesner's "conjugate observables", which is now called
BB84. [6] In 1991 Artur Ekert developed a different approach to quantum key distribution based on peculiar quantum correlations
known as quantum entanglement.
[7]
Contents
History
